## Reason

### Individuality Which, to Itself,<br>is Real in and for Itself

With the fall of virtue, the lone individual has reached its apex, and can no
longer pretend that wisdom and happiness can be found when one lives outside of
society and the way of the world. Self-consciousness has been brought to the
realisation that individual action, regardless of its intentions, is always part
of a social whole greater than any one person. What this means, Hegel explains,
is that 'Self-consciousness has now grasped the concept of itself, which was
initially only our concept of it.'[^1] Hegel is referring here to the *idealist*
concept of self-consciousness, which served as the starting point of the whole
*Reason* chapter, namely: self-consciousness is that which knows itself to be
'all reality'.[^2]

Now that the individual no longer acts 'in *opposition* to immediately existent
actuality [i.e. society]', and instead recognises itself as *part* of that
actuality, it has *reconciled* self-consciousness and being. In other words, now
that it has truly grasped the concept of what it really is, self-consciousness
'is the category which has become conscious of itself.'[^3] In this accomplished
state, aware of itself as a 'permeation of the universal ... and individuality',
self-consciousness 'begins anew from itself, not by directing itself towards *an
other* but by directing itself *towards itself*.'[^4] Self-consciousness is now
concerned not with *ideological* motivations, as the knight of virtue was, but
with the natural actions of communal, social survival: caring and being cared
for, working, education, living and dying. For 'the man of the *Weltlauf*',
Koj√®ve writes, 'what counts is not ideas but concrete action, and it is this
action that creates (social, political, historical) human reality.'[^5] This
action 'alters nothing and opposes nothing', Hegel explains, because it is no
longer carried out in *opposition* to something (the pain of necessity, laws of
society, etc.).[^6]

What is left of the enormous *Reason* chapter is an examination of this new form
of self-consciousness, who acts out 'the *exhibition* or *expression of
individuality*' and has left behind all grand ideology to instead pursue simple
self-expression in 'the pure form of translating *not having been seen* into
*having been seen*.'[^7] Accordingly, Pinkard suggests that this is the point in
humanity's development when genuine *autobiography* emerges. In the pre-modern
world, books by writers like Augustine and Peter Abelard were written to fit a
religious narrative (of falling away from God and rediscovering one's religion);
Augustine's *Confessions* in particular are explicitly addressed to God. In
Rousseau's *Confessions*, however, the author presents himself as a unique
individual, and 'not just an instance of some more general pattern.'[^8]
