#### The Spiritual Animal Kingdom and Deception {#animal}

The individual now knows itself to be 'all reality', but *what is* this reality?
At first, it is not very much at all: the individual's sense of itself starts as
nothing but an '*abstract universal*', some *potential* cause or vocation.[^9]
Until a person acts upon the abstract idea of their vocation, it is really
nothing more than abstractness. As such, it is still crucial for us to focus on
the *activity* of the individual.

Individuality 'comes on the scene', Hegel writes, 'as an original determinate
nature.'[^10] A person is restricted -- their existence is in some part
determined -- by the kind of animal they are (an animal that cannot fly, that
cannot breathe underwater, etc.), and as such they are limited to a certain
range of activity. Within this range, however, '*the doing* of consciousness'
cannot be limited, and the individual is free. Indeed, Hegel points out that the
determinate nature of the individual is not regarded as 'a restriction which it
would want to transcend': unlike the unhappy consciousness, who dreamt of
overcoming its bodily existence (but also knew this dream to be impossible), the
real individual enjoys their limited capacities, because it is *through* them --
when they are put into practice -- that the individual is merged with
reality.[^11] That is to say, the *actualisation* of the individual's talents
serves as a mediation between the individual's consciousness (their intentions,
the purpose of their activity, and so on) and the world itself. This is the
*rational* manifestation of the 'labor of the negative' that appeared in the
Preface and in the slave's liberation in *Self-Consciousness*: through the
individual's doing, they come to face' the object as it has emerged from the
actor to be outside of him and to be *for him* as an *other*.'[^12] The
difference here is that, while the slave's work brought the slave to an
awareness of *themselves*, the real individual's work brings them to an
awareness of their unity with their environment, of the 'permeation' of
universality and individuality mentioned above.
