### Sartrean Animals {#sartre}
#### A short interlude {.subtitle}

It is well known that French existentialism was influenced by Alexandre KojÃ¨ve's
lectures on Hegel, where the relation of master to slave was taken as the centre
of Hegel's thought. In Sartre's *Being and Nothingness*, however, there are some
passages that prompt comparisons with Hegel's chapter on the animal kingdom
(whether or not this was Sartre's intention). In his chapter on concrete
relations with others, Sartre explicitly cites Hegel on mastery and servitude,
but he acknowledges that there is a strict limit to the comparison between his
concerns and Hegel's concerns in that chapter.[^69] It is the animal kingdom, I
would argue, where Hegel really shares concerns with Sartre in this regard.

The work of the slave is lonely and bound to be forgotten; so long as it serves
a purpose for the master, no assessment is passed on it at all. (Indeed, it is
*through* their work that the slave comes to shrug off the influence of the
'outsider's mind'.)[^70] In the animal kingdom, however, the gaze of the other
individuals persists throughout, in the spirit of competition: at every stage of
my activity, I *cannot help* but consider how the activity appears to others. By
acting, the individual 'has placed himself outside of himself', into public
visibility.[^71] It is here that we notice what Sartre described as 'the look'
[*le regard*], where 'my fundamental connection with the Other-as-subject must
be able to be referred back to my permanent possibility of *being seen* by the
Other ... I see *myself* because *somebody* sees me.'[^72]

When Sartre looks at phenomena like insecurity, shame, and love, he comes
incredibly close to the Hegelian points which I have compared to Barthes. When,
through acting, the individual submits themselves into 'universal consciousness'
-- when they enter themselves into the market -- they betray their
individuality, the dimension of their existence that had seemed to be private.
The Other cannot judge me based on my intentions, plans, and so on; it is only
in the *actuality* of these -- that is, in my *activity* -- that I can be
recognised or (mis)understood. The way Sartre thinks about this is that the
*look* of the Other betrays the narrative that I am telling myself about my
activity. The 'secret' of my activity is not an inner intention, hidden away
from public; rather, it is that *visible* dimension of my activity, available
*only* to the public and hidden from me. 'The Other looks at me and as such he
holds the secret of my being, he knows what I am,' Sartre writes: 'thus the
profound meaning of my being is outside of me, imprisoned in an absence.'[^73]

The real overlap between Hegel and Sartre here is twofold. Firstly, both of them
claim that the interpretation of an individual and their activity takes place on
the **surface**: as Sartre writes,

> For the Other I *am* seated as this inkwell *is* on the table; for the Other,
> I *am* leaning over the keyhole as this tree *is* bent by the wind. Thus for
> the Other I have stripped myself of my transcendence. This is because my
> transcendence becomes for whoever makes himself a witness of it ... a purely
> established transcendence, a given-transcendence; that is, it acquires a
> nature by the sole fact that the Other confers on it an outside.[^74]

Secondly, it is this surface -- not any kind of interiority (private
individuality for Hegel, or a personal sense of being-for-itself for Sartre) --
that holds the **authority** of who I am and what I am doing. In the animal
kingdom, an individual cannot appeal to their intentions or aims to convince
others of the value of their work; the value is found in the surface layer of
the work's actuality. And for Sartre, it is a form of 'bad faith' to appeal to
some interiority and undermine the authority that our visible existence has on
who we are. There cannot be any disconnect between what we do and what we *mean*
to do, for Sartre, since the starting point of human existence is a radical
kind of freedom. (It is on this basis that Sartre rejects psychoanalysis.)

Of course, Sartre didn't simply repeat Hegel. It is perhaps in the notion of
radical freedom that the difference between Sartrean relations and the animal
kingdom is found. For both Hegel and Sartre, all activity is a kind of negating:
'*doing* is itself nothing but negativity', Hegel claims.[^75] Sartre agrees
when he writes that 'Hegel is right rather than Heidegger when he states that
Mind is the negative'; he claims that the freedom of the subject for-itself is
'constituted' by the 'negating act.'[^76] However, in the chapter on the animal
kingdom, Hegel describes activity as negating an 'original determinate nature'
-- the particular restrictive qualities of the acting being (subh as their
body). For Sartre, activity is negative because the choice of one action negates
all other possibilities -- he refuses the idea of an 'original nature' that is
supposed to be negated by an act. Indeed, in existentialism there is no human
nature at all. 'Existence precedes essence': first, the human *simply exists*,
and acts only once they have encountered themselves in an experience with the
Other. The body is not a restriction for Sartre as it is for Hegel. In *Being
and Nothingness* he claims enigmatically that 'I exist my body'; that is, the
very being of the body -- namely, as a 'lived' thing -- is determined by us and
disclosed to us in our activity; is is nothing at all prior to the
act.[^77]

The notion of original nature leads Hegel to a *Meno*-style paradox involved in
the activity of the animal kingdom. In order to act in accordance with my
nature, I must know my nature; but ino rder to know my nature, I must first make
it explicit *by acting*. The Sartrean solution to this paradox is that there is
no 'nature' that the human acts on in the first place; rather, the human *is*
its acting. The activity comes before any 'nature', since the individual's
radical freedom allows them to act without the presupposition of any restriction
or inclination. ... Interestingly enough, however, this is very clsoe to the
solution that Hegel proposes himself. The individual 'has to begin
*immediately*', he claims: activity *is* the beginning, middle, and end of
itself, and this idea is seemingly close to the claim that the human -- at least
as it is understood in the animal kingdom -- is radically free. Perhaps, from
the Sartrean perspective, Hegel's insistence on original nature preceding action
introduces a contradiction into his argument. Did Sartre realise the truth of
Hegel's thought more than Hegel did himself?
