#### Law-Giving Reason {#giving}

Now that the obsession with the crux of the matter has been inverted and fallen
into universal deception, and this deception has itself been inverted and moved
aside for the rise of spiritual essence, the scene is set for a new shape of
consciousness: that of 'law-giving reason'. When consciousness takes this shape,
it no longer takes its original determinate nature to be the primary, 'positive'
determination of its activity and purpose.[^50] Instead, consciousness starts to
grasp the 'spiritual essence' of society, and focuses on a new object whose
existence 'is the *actuality* and the doing of self-consciousness': no more
wasting time with intentions, aims, and reputations.[^51] This new object is
*ethical substance* (or what we might call 'social substance'), and it holds
absolutely for our ethical consciousness: who would want to transcend that which
substantiates and is substantiated by one's own activity (along with the
activity of everyone else), and from which actual laws can be derived, so
solidly that anyone with '*healthy reason*' immediately knows right from
wrong?[^52]

Of course, Hegel's repeated lesson in the *Phenomenology* is that there is
always an inherent limit to any such immediately desirable situation. As such,
though consciousness now has ethical substance as its object, it is not yet at
the stage of Spirit. The consciousness of law-giving reason is still too
individualistic; it sees ethical substance all around but does not understand
its role in this substance. 'The individual self is still distinct from the
substance of which it is the self, and substance is still separate from this
self.'[^53]

This short section is consequently devoted to undermining reason's claim that it
can devise necessary moral laws -- *laws of nature*, perhaps -- simply through
abstract rational thought. Such laws always collapse, Hegel will argue, because
in aiming for *necessity* they fail to incorporate the *contingency* that runs
throughout diverse individuals in ethical life. Just like in sensuous certainty,
Hegel is here demonstrating that immediate claims to truth amount to very
little.

The first attempt at an immediately valid law is: 'everyone ought to speak the
truth.'[^54] An instruction that is so succinct almost instantly requires
clarification: for instance, what if I don't *know* the truth? Am I therefore
prohibited from speaking at all? Accordingly, the law is revised: 'everyone
should speak the truth, at all times according to his knowing and conviction of
it.' Now, it's easy to imagine that this amendment might be given with some tone
of frustration: *of course* this law doesn't prohibit you from speaking simply
because you don't know the truth -- even if that wasn't *stated*, it should have
just been understood! As Hegel puts it, 'healthy reason ... will also explain
that this condition is already so closely linked with its universal
pronouncements that it is how it *meant* that the command was to be taken.'
Law-giving reason thus claims that, in giving a law that requires truth-telling,
it *meant* something other than what was directly *said*... What is this if not
a failure to tell the truth? We might grant that the law only had to be revised
because a potential misunderstanding was discovered, but this isn't good enough
for a law: what kind of law is 'left up to the contingency' of whether or not it
will convince people or satisfy its own demands? This law is not as necessary as
its expression would suggest; as Hyppolite puts it, laws of this kind 'manifest
a contingency which derives from the individuality of the consciousness that
formulates them.'[^55]

Secondly, Hegel looks at one of the most famous 'laws' of all time: 'love thy
neighbour as thyself.'[^56] He suggests that a charitable interpretation of this
rule is that we should aim both to keep others out of harm's way and to bring
good to them. But *what* good? Is the good for my neighbour necessarily what is
good for me? Should I deliver the same good to every individual? This rule can
only be meaningful if it contradicts its necessity by allowing room for the
contingency of individual 'neighbours'. Furthermore, Hegel claims (in a rather
unromantic remark) that I alone cannot bring much good to another person when my
action is compared with that of the wider social community or the state. Further
than this, as Harris points out, 'I can do *no* good for my neighbour (or
myself) unless we are participants in the great common good that we call "the
State." It is our commitment to, and membership in, the community ... that
enables us to be good to one another.'[^57] Consequently, Hegel concludes, 'the
only significance that remains to beneficence is that of sentiment.'

What Hegel realises in his deconstruction of these 'laws' is that the contingent
individuality of a speaker quickly undermines the universality of the speaker's
claim. This is what Jacques Lacan understood as the difference between the
content of 'the enunciated' and the subject of 'the enunciation'.[^58] Think
back to sensuous certainty, where Hegel shows that 'what is meant' is, in act
and in fact, '*inaccessible*' to language and to consciousness.[^59] The same
difficulty arises here, when the enunciated universality in 'everyone ought to
speak the truth' is undermined by the subjective contingency of the
consciousness enunciating it. These 'laws of nature' therefore express nothing
more than a '*formal*' or abtract universality which has as little concrete
content as a tautology.[^60] For Lacan, this undermining is what reveals to us
the unconscious (indeed, the subject of the enunciation *is* the unconscious
subject). Similarly, for Hegel it is always the surplus element that undermines
a claim to universality that reveals a more comprehensive truth.[^61] In this
context, it is the (importance of the) subjective position of consciousness
*within* ethical substance that is revealed to us; in other words, the emptiness
of law-giving reason takes consciousness closer to the realisation that the
subjective *and* the universal must be combined in a shared way of life (that
is, *spirit*) in order for moral maxims to have any concrete content.

If it is always the case for Hegel that the undermining of a claim to truth is
what takes us to a more *comprehensive* truth, it must also be the case that the
weaker, narrower claim must come first. Consequently, pre-spiritual reason has
one last attempt before we arrive at the stage of spirit. This last attempt is
what Hegel calls **law-testing reason**, and it is, in some sense, a little more
humble than law-giving reason: rather than trying to *command* humanity on the
basis of reason or 'common sense', consciousness now sets about to use its
reason merely for *testing* laws (or maxims) that are already presented to it.
