## Spirit {#begin}

### Prelude
#### on History in the *Phenomenology* {.subtitle}

According to György Lukács, in the *Phenomenology* the entirety of human history
(up to 1807, at least) is 'traversed *three times*'.[^1] Using the terms that
Hegel adopts later in the *Encyclopaedia*, Lukács considers these three
repetitions to be concerned with *subjective spirit*, *objective spirit*, and
finally *absolute spirit*. The first part covers the development of *thought*
throughout history, from sensuous certainty to law-testing reason. The second
part, which consists only of the chapter on *Spirit*, repeats this historical
account from the perspective of the objective -- social -- context in which
thought takes place. Finally, in the chapters on *Religion* and *Absolute
Knowing*, we arrive at an absolute standpoint where the whole of history can be
surveyed at once and the 'laws *governing the movement* of history' or 'the
dialectics of reality' can be comprehended.[^2] In this interpretation, the
*Phenomenology of Spirit* is literally a history book; sensuous certainty is
understood to be chronologically prior to perception, phrenology is understood
as a successor (at least indirectly) to Baconian science, and so on.

This view of Hegel's book is not very popular anymore. For a start, if Hegel
were really trying to write a history, he would have made some significant
errors: for example, the unhappy consciousness he describes quite early in the
book exhibits a religious alienation (separation from God) that has manifested
*throughout* history, in some cases after Hegel's death (for example, in
Kierkegaard). And although there are some coincidental accuracies in the
ordering of positions (Augustine, for example, was a skeptic before he was an
unhappy Christian, just like the *Phenomenology*'s protagonist), they are
outnumbered by the *in*accuracies (in Hegel's narrative, stoicism precedes
skepticism; in Greece, Pyrrho preceded Zeno). However, these points could be
interpreted as signs that Hegel merely wrote a *bad* history -- not that he
didn't intend to write a history at all. Michael N. Forster defends Lukács's
reading on the basis of certain remarks that Hegel himself makes:[^3]

> The series of the figurations of consciousness which consciousness traverses
> on this path is the **full history** of the *cultivation* of consciousness
> into science.[^4]

> Only the whole spirit is in time, and the shapes, which are shapes of the
> whole *spirit* as such, exhibit themselves **in a sequence**
> [*Aufeinanderfolger*], one after the other.[^5]

Is it really the case, however, that 'history' or 'sequence' in this sense
necessarily refers to the *actual* history of humanity, in the precise order
that it took place? It is more accurate to think of the *Phenomenology* as a
narrative of the development of thought (and subjectivity, society, and so on)
that *takes the shape of a history* but is not itself directly correspondent
with 'real' history. In what we have read so far, the concrete historical
phenomena named by Hegel have only been *examples of manifestations* of
particular shapes of consciousness, and this is wholly distinct from them
*being* these shapes exactly. Hegel acknowledges this explicitly when he writes
in the *Self-Consciousness* chapter: 'As it has consciously appeared in the
history of spirit, this freedom of self-consciousness has, as is well known,
been called *stoicism*.'[^6] The 'real' stoicism -- that is, the movement
elaborated by Zeno, Seneca, and so on -- is simply one 'conscious appearance' in
history of what Hegel is talking about (albeit a particularly prominent
appearance). The narrative depicted in the *Phenomenology* is thus a possible
manifestation of the development of consciousness -- a development whose stages
manifest in contingent ways but is nonetheless governed by the necessity of
logic.

With that being said, it is nonetheless the case that the chapters on *Spirit*
and *Religion* are more consciously informed by 'real' history. We will see in
*Spirit*, for example, that the Enlightenment reaches its truth in a revolution
which eventually culminates in 'terror' -- and this, of course, is precisely
what happened in Europe at the turn of the nineteenth century. This relates to
what Lukács got *right* about the structure of the *Phenomenology*: namely, that
it is in the *Spirit* chapter that the history of society is foregrounded, no
longer a 'shadowy, enigmatic backcloth' for the development of *individual*
consciousness, but rather 'a coherent rational order' that allows us to
comprehend 'the rise of modern civil society' (which, according to Lukács, is
Hegel's central preoccupation).[^7]
