### True Spirit, Ethical Life {#true}

As I have mentioned in my introduction, many of Hegel's contemporaries idolised
ancient Greece. In his own way, Hegel did as well; however, he attributed more
discordance to Greek society than writers like Goethe, Schiller, or Winckelmann
were willing to. In the present chapter ('True Spirit, Ethical Life'), Hegel
first analyses the harmonious dimension of ancient Greece (in the section 'The
Ethical World, the Human and Divine Law, Man and Woman') -- this is the
dimension of Greece that his contemporaries admired. Secondly, however (in the
section entitled 'Ethical Action, Human and Divine Knowing, Guilt and Fate'),
Hegel finds a disruption of this harmony which, he argues, the Greek tragedians
were the first to recognise. In this way, Hegel is not as dogmatic a philhellene
as some of his contemporaries were.

#### The Burial of the Dead {#dead}

Aristotle argues that, in the study of ethics, 'we must begin with things known
to us'.[^29] The 'starting points' of ethical reflection, according to
Aristotle, originate in the habits we acquire in our upbringing; in other words,
to study ethics, one must first have some ethical background on which to
reflect. Ethical substance, which has not yet been raised to the self-awareness
of ethical *actuality*, is that background in the stage of 'ethical life'.
Ethical life (*Sittlichkeit*) is for Hegel the stage in a society's history
where people do not fully acknowledge their participation as constituents of
ethical substance; rather, they simply contemplate it as what is 'there'.[^30]
In this sense, Harris argues, ethical life is akin to unhappy consciousness
insofar as it is not really *self*-consciousness but is instead a mere
'awareness' of some *other* (namely, the ethical substance).[^31]

In other words, the structure of ethical life -- which we call *law* -- appears
to the citizen of ethical life as an immediate *given*. What is essential for
Hegel, however, is that it is a *split* given: spirit 'descends upon us' in two
ways, two kinds of law. Firstly, as a 'natural ethical' phenomenon, it is given
as '**divine law**' into which one is born as a person qua *natural being*: a
law which is manifested in family ties.[^32] Hegel's idea here is that the
natural (that is, biological) relations between family members give rise to
certain ethical obligations and duties that family members owe one another. This
dimension of the law emphasises *individuality*; the family is (for Hegel) a
private community separated from the universality of public life. The second
kind of law concerns this universality: it is the 'familiarly known' law, the
legal system into which one is born as a person qua *citizen*. Hegel calls this
'**human law**'; it is determined and enforced by 'the government'.[^33]

The relation between these two spheres of ethical life is crucial for Hegel.
First of al, the divine law of the family and the existence of oneself as a
family member is more immediate than one's status as a citizen. I consciously
carry out my citizenship, and it can be debated and determined by the state
(think of refugees, for example), but on the other hand I *immediately am* in a
family, among 'unblemished heavenly shapes' of 'unprofaned innocence', without
any conscious effort required on my part.[^34] Divine law is intuitive, Hegel
argues, and 'does not lie in the daylight of consciousness.'[^35] Nonetheless,
it has a close relation to the human law of the public sphere. Though the family
emerges in the domain of nature and the individual, its *ethical* dimension is
concerned with culture and the universal -- because 'the ethical is in itself
universal.'[^36] For Hegel, this means that love and sentiment have no relevance
to the family as an ethical structure, because love is 'natural' and not
ethical. Rather, the ethical purpose of the family is not to love and care for
one another, but to allow one's family members to break out of the family and
into culture and the public sphere. Family duty 'consists in taking the singular
individual out of the family, in subjugating his naturalness and individuality,
and thus in leading him towards *virtue*, towards a life lived in and for the
universal.'[^37] As such, Hegel thinks that the function of the family is to
undermine the family; family ties are created so that they can be left behind.

There is, however, a second duty for the family which is 'positive' rather than
'negative'. The family's positive duty is towards the family member who, 'out of
the long progression of his dispersed existence, is condensed into one completed
shape': that is, the individual who has died.[^38] In performing a proper burial
for the dead, the family resists the deceased's dissolution into nature: by
mourning, the dead individual is reasserted -- 'saved' -- as a universal being.
As Hegel understands it, the Greeks practiced burial rites because they
interpreted human life as always already ethical; natural existence (and natural
relations like those of the family) must be taken as embodying ethical norms.
Burial is the divine law's way of maintaining the spiritual existence of an
individual. But this maintenance can also come from the spiritual realm itself,
the realm of human law and government. As an example, Hegel points out the
frequency of warfare in ancient Greece: Greek war, he claims, was a way of
making men 'feel the power of their lord and master, death', and preventing them
from falling back into their 'mere' natural existence.[^39]

In the domain of both human law (war) and divine law (burial), *death* is the
crucial moment in determining an individual's ethical status. When an individual
dies in vain, or dies without being mourned, their universal (ethical) dimension
is destroyed as they become absorbed by nature; if, however, they die for a
'cause', or their death is properly mourned, then the ethical community
'supplements the abstract natural movement by adding to it the movement of
consciousness, by *interrupting nature's work*, and by wresting the
blood-relation away from destruction.'[^40]

Following this, Hegel turns back to family relations and their spiritual
significance -- or, indeed, *in*significance: Hegel's analysis of the family is
particularly cold and dismissive of familial love and care. The specific picture
of a family that he analyses is strictly heterosexual and is oriented almost
totally to the purpose of having children. He starts, therefore, with the
relationship between a husband and wife. This relationship, Hegel claims, is
'only the *representation* and *picture* of spirit'; it does not have
significant spiritual value because the recognition between a husband and wife
is 'natural' (that is, romantic and emotional) rather than ethical. Furthermore,
he argues, the actuality of a marital relationship is external to the
relationship itself -- the relationship is actualised in the child. Hegel even
claims that, with the birth of the child, the purpose of the marital
relationship is achieved and the relationship consequently becomes obsolete
('disappears').[^41] This is presumably what Beauvoir is thinking of when she
repeatedly attributes to Hegel the idea that 'the birth of children is the death
of parents.'[^42]

What about the relationship between parent and child? This also is too impure
for Hegel. Firstly, again, it is 'affected by emotion' (Hegel does not use the
word 'love' to identify this emotion, but instead describes it as the parent's
awareness that the child symbolises the actuality of their marital
relationship); secondly, the child -- despite being the ultimate product of the
parents' relationship -- attains their own being-for-itself, their own autonomy,
and becomes 'an alien actuality' to their parents, undermining any sense of
harmony in the family. Likewise, the child's relationship to their parent is
impure because they are aware of the 'vanishing' of their parents' marital
relationship. This is an awareness that is brought onto the child 'only through
the separation from their origin', that is, through the precise separation that
Freud would also eventually identify as constitutive of human mental life.
