## Introduction {#int}

### What is the *Phenomenology of Spirit*? {#what}

> I saw the Emperor – this world-soul – riding out of the city on
> reconnaissance. It is indeed a wonderful sensation to see such an individual,
> who, concentrated here at a single point, astride a horse, reaches out over
> the world and masters it ... this extraordinary man, whom it is impossible not
> to admire.

In October 1806, as Napoleon entered Jena, Hegel finished his first book: *The
Phenomenology of Spirit*. The book is intended to serve as an introduction to
Hegel's system of science, showing the 'coming to be of knowledge', as
**spirit** [*Geist*] makes its way through various stages towards the stage of
scientific knowing, or, *absolute spirit*.<sup>[a](#a)</sup> The book is thus a
*phenomenology* insofar as it analyses the phenomena (that is, the
*appearances*) of consciousness's various attempts at absolute knowledge. This
is undoubtedly an ambitious project; and as such it is no surprise that the book
is incredibly complex and difficult to understand, even for somebody familiar
with modern German philosophy. The sheer difficulty in reading Hegel's
*Phenomenology* has led to a large quantity of incommensurable readings of the
text: it has been interpreted as a metaphysical Bildungsroman, a systematic
defence of orthodox Christianity, a revolutionary *critique* of Christianity,
and as a text that is proto-existentialist, proto-communist, proto-fascist, or
proto-nihilistic. The two social categories of twentieth century philosophical
thought - 'analytic' and 'Continental' philosophy - both emerged from the
British and Austro-German reception of Hegel's work. Prior to the Second World
War, Hegel scholarship was often dogmatic or idiosyncratic, with Alexandre
Kojève's famous reading<sup>[b](#b)</sup>, endorsed by Sartre and De Beauvoir,
emphasising subjective relations of *desire* as the central element of Hegel's
thought, and Russell and Moore's complete rejection of British Hegelian thought
as needlessly obscure. In the 1940s and onwards, however, rigorous studies in
German, French, and eventually English have put the *Phenomenology* beneath a
brighter and clearer light. Though there is still a lot of disagreement over the
interpretation of Hegel, we are now in a better place than ever to understand
what the meaning and purpose of his *Phenomenology of Spirit* is.

### Why a 'System' of Science? {#why}

Part of what makes Hegel's work so intimidating is its insistence on
systematicity. The *Phenomenology* alone is an incredibly systematic work,
making its way rigorously from the most basic form of consciousness, to the
sophistications of religion and politics. But the *Phenomenology* itself is only
an *introduction* to Hegel's larger system of science as a whole ... where does
this insistence on systematic philosophy come from? The answer is found in the
context of German philosophy in which Hegel's work came about, and helps us to
understand the function of the *Phenomenology*.

#### Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi {#jacobi}

If Socrates was the gadfly of Ancient Athens, Jacobi was the gadfly of late
nineteenth-century Germany. The 'pantheism controversy' that shook up German
(and eventually, wider European) intellectual culture was initiated when Jacobi
made provocative claims against Gotthold Lessing and the tradition of German
(Leibnizian) rationalism that was predominant at the time. According to Jacobi,
rationalism - which understood *reasons* as grounding explanations for facts -
inevitably led to monistic, fatalist atheism of the controversial kind that
Spinoza had been accused of. The principle of Leibnizian rationalism was the
*Principle of Sufficient Reason*, which Jacobi equated with the idea that *ex
nihilo nihil fit*. Consequently, the rationalist must accept that the reason for
X also has a reason, which also has a reason, and so on. The notion of a **first
cause** thus emerges to halt this infinite regress of reasons; though we might
suspect that God would be identified as the first cause, Jacobi's reading of
Spinoza led him to claim otherwise. For Spinoza, the first cause is *being
itself*, or, the totality of *all that is*, because a first cause could be
neither transcendental (and therefore conditioned by nothing, contravening the
Principle of Sufficient Reason) nor rational (and therefore capable of
representation, making it relational and therefore not self-standing).
Thus, according to Spinoza (and Jacobi), rationalism is necessarily atheistic.
It is also fatalistic, because to affirm free will is to affirm the possibility
of multiple first causes (i.e. willing agents), and nihilistic, since it denies
the existence of entities altogether: for Spinoza, every 'thing' is merely a
modification of the single substance (*being* or nature).<sup>[c](#c)</sup>

The German rationalist project was thereby called into question by Jacobi. If it
was really the case that rationalism inevitably led to atheism, fatalism, and
nihilism, then clearly some alternative was due. Jacobi's solution was not to
*refute* rationalism, since to do so would be to continue the rationalist
paradigm of providing endless reasons for all knowledge. Instead, Jacobi
redefined reason as a matter of 'natural faith' through which we *perceive* (but
don't necessarily *cognise*) the infinite.

#### Immanuel Kant {#kant}

Even more famously than Jacobi, Kant's *Critique of Pure Reason* dealt with the
failure of rationalism's monistic system (monistic because it unifies everything
beneath one first cause). Aside from his influence from Hume (see
[here](https://anna099.github.io/kant/#gen-prob)), Kant's work was also
motivated by a tension between **Newton's** system of natural science (in which
everything had a sufficient cause, and there was no first cause or 'causal God')
and **Leibniz's** metaphysics which demanded that everything be intelligible (and
thereby required the grounding of a first cause). The Kantian solution was a new
kind of dualism in which the physical (Newtonian phenomena) and the metaphysical
(Leibnizian intelligibility) operate at different levels of explanation. Thus,
for Kant, the mind has separate faculties: the receptive *sensibility*, which
intuits finitely intelligible (i.e. causal) information from the Newtonian
physical world, and the spontaneous faculty of *reason*, which cognised about
infinitely intelligible (i.e. Leibnizian, grounded) things in themselves -
albeit only in a *formal* sense.

<div class="footnotes">
a. <a name="a"></a> G.W.F. Hegel, *The Phenomenology of Spirit*, translated by T. Pinkard. (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2018), p. 468.

b. <a name="b"></a> Kojève, Alexandre, *Introduction To The Reading Of Hegel*, translated by R. Queneau. (Ithaca, Cornell University Press, 1980).

c. <a name="c"></a> An elaboration of Jacobi's argumentation can be found in Paul Franks, "All or Nothing", in *The Cambridge Companion to German Idealism*, edited by K. Ameriks. (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2017), pp. 128-153.
</div>
