#### Reflections on Sensuous Certainty {#re-s-c}

Sensuous certainty is the beginning for Hegel precisely because it is the
beginning for *us*; as the Introduction states, it is a mistake to make a fuss
about *how to begin* before actually beginning. In actual fact, 'this fear of
erring is already the error itself'.[^5] By asking if it is even *possible* for
cognition to apprehend the absolute, this fear of error presupposes that
cognition stands outside of, or apart from, the absolute (that is, the truth),
and yet can still somehow be truthful itself. This is clearly a mistake; as
such, Hegel puts issues of method to one side, and simply *begins* his analysis
of experience. As Frederick Beiser writes: 'The standards, rules, and guidelines
appropriate to a subject matter should be the result, not the starting point, of
the investigation. So, if Hegel has any methodology at all, it appears to be an
*anti*-methodology, a method to suspend all methods.'[^6] So, the
*Phenomenology* begins with the most familiar, unconceptualised form of
experience: immediate certainty of sensuous objects. The language that expresses
this experience - at least according to 'common sense' - expresses the simple,
particular being of these objects. 'We are in the world that Adam bequeathed to
us,' Harris writes, 'the world of *things with names* ... this is how our
language gets its significance - by referring to objects whose "being" we can
confirm by a simple use of the senses.'[^7]

It is language that best illuminates the dialectic of sensuous certainty.
Language, in naming the 'immediate' object of experience, realises before we do
that the immediate - 'what *truly* is' - is precisely what is *not*. As soon as
I put a name to *this moment*, it has passed away and *is* no longer. The actual
truth lies in the universality of the concepts that language employs, and *not*
in the things of experience. As such, the modern skeptics like Hume, who endorse
skepticism by accepting immediate certainty of sensuous objects as the *only*
knowable truth, are insufficiently skeptical: they fail to notice that there is
nothing universal in immediate objects whatsoever. 'The experience of the
sensible world teaches us that truth is properly to be found in the *concepts*
to which names refer, and that the reference of names to things is only possible
in the context of a time and space that are already concepts.'[^8]
