### Perception {#per}

Where sensuous certainty claimed to find absolute truth in the particular and
the immediate, perception - arising *necessarily* from the dialectic of sensuous
certainty - makes its claim to absolute truth in mediated, simple universals:
precisely, *things*. A thing is a thing with many properties, perceived by a
universal subject. The Thing of perception is the result of the sublated This
that had its origin in sensuous certainty; as a determine negation, a
*not-This*, the Thing is determined by its *mediacy*, its *universality*, and
its *differentiation*. In the Thing, a manifold of properties is unified;
'*many* such properties are posited at the same time, and each one is the
negative of the other'. The universal (that is, the unified Thing)
'expresses' the manifold properties, but the properties themselves are also
determined by '*relating themselves to themselves*', and by '*permeat[ing]* each
other in that universality as a *simple* unity without *making contact with*
each other'. We can consequently say that the Thing is mediated through its
properties, and its properties through itself; indeed, Hegel defines '*thinghood*
itself' as 'a *simple togetherness of the many*'.[^11]

The properties of a thing are indifferent to one another. A pebble is smooth,
and also heavy, but its smoothness makes no difference to its heaviness, and
vice versa. How, then, are they part of the same thing? For one, they all 'are
in *one* simple *Here* in which they also permeate each other. None has a
different Here from the others. Rather, each is everywhere in the same Here as
are the others.'[^12] Hegel accordingly finds that it is the 'indifferent
*Also*' that relates these properties to one another, and allows them to come
together as a unified manifold, constituting the thing. (Thus the conclusion of
the above paragraph, that thinghood is the 'togetherness of the many': thinghood
is the *Also* itself).

Thinghood-as-togetherness is the *positive* determination of the thing; however,
in order to be itself, a thing must also have a *negative* determination: that
is to say, a pebble is only a pebble insofar as it is *not* a bicycle, *not* an
owl, and so on. The properties of a thing must not only relate to themselves,
therefore, but must also *oppose* one another, to differentiate themselves. As
such, the difference of manifold properties within a unified thing 'does not
amount to an indifferent difference but rather to an excluding difference'.[^13]
The relation of a property to other properties thus *reaches out* of the thing
that the property belongs to. Hegel thus describes the Thing as a 'simple medium
[which] is not only an *Also*, an indifferent unity; [but] also a *One*, an
*excluding unity*'.[^14] *Negation is a constituent of thinghood*.

At this point, Hegel explicates the three moments of the Thing as it is grasped
by perception so far. Firstly, it is an 'indifferent passive universality'; a
*medium* in which multiple properties reside, indifferent to one another, and
related merely by an *Also*. Secondly, it is a *negative universality*; a 'One'
which is individuated through *negation* and exclusion of the other. And lastly,
it is also the *sum total of its properties*, as those properties reveal
themselves to be universal in their own right, not only differentiating
themselves *passively* from one another (as Also), but also differentiating
themselves *negatively* from the properties of the Other (i.e., the not-One).
This last moment of the Thing is 'the relation of the first two moments' since
the elements of the Also (that is, the *properties*) are themselves behaving
like the One, insofar as they negatively differentiate themselves (from the
properties of the Other).

> According to the aspect in which these differences belong to the indifferent
> medium [i.e., the Thing as a passive universality, as 'Also'], the differences
> are themselves universal; each relates itself only to itself, and they do not
> affect each other. However, according to the aspect, in terms of which they
> belong to the negative unity [i.e., the Thing as One, differentiated from the
> Other], they at the same time exclude each other, but necessarily have this
> opposed relation to the properties, which are at a distance from *their Also*
> [i.e., the properties of the Other]. [^15]

Just like any shape of consciousness, perception is a claim to absolute truth.
The standard of perceptual truth is: *have I apprehended the object?* If the
perceiver's apprehension is *equal* to the object itself, and *corresponds* with
it, then the perception is true. Naturally, error is possible insofar as it is
possible to misapprehend an object. But importantly, any such error must be
because of some untruth on behalf of the *perceiver*, not the perceived object;
in comparing the perceiver's apprehension with the object, any inequality that
shows up must be an 'untruth of perceiving itself', and not an untruth of the
object, since 'the object is what is equal to itself'.[^16] The German word for
perception is *Wahrnehmung*; the task for the perceiver is as simple as having
to take [*nehmung*] the true [*wahr*].
