### Force and the Understanding {#und}
#### Appearance and the Supersensible World {.subtitle}

Part A of the *Phenomenology*, entitled *Consciousness*, shows the development
of universality - that is, the development of that which makes objects
thinkable. In sensuous certainty, universality was simply denied; consciousness
claimed to have immediate access to its object as a This. But this claim turned
out to be untrue, and sensuous certainty gave rise to the sensuous universal -
the property - which perception embraced, in its conceptualising of the
individual Thing. This, too, turned out to be mistaken, as the individuality
that perception held to be true was mere sophistry, and what emerged was a
notion of the Thing as being-for-another: a set of relations to other things
(other sets of relations). Perception thereby ended in a deadlock between
being-for-itself and being-for-another. The *unity* of this opposition is what
gives rise to the *understanding*, and its object: the *unconditioned
universal*, or, as Hegel refers to it in the title: **force**. Now since
being-for-itself and being-for-another are hereby united, we can no longer make
claims about objects as they are *for us* without also making the same claims
about the objects as they are *in themselves*. Otherwise, we would end up back
in the aporia of perception, wherein consciousness seems to falsify the object.
So - how does Hegel make sense of this unity, this 'force'?

Force was a central concept in eighteenth-century physics, with Leibniz and
Newton establishing the system of *dynamics* - that is, the science of force
which attempts to find regularity in the apparently chaotic universe: why do
objects fall to the ground? Why do the planets move? What keeps me from falling
through my chair? -- These are central questions of force. Force can therefore
be understood as *cause and effect*, *expression and expressed*, and so on. It
is in this section of the *Phenomenology*, on force and the understanding, in
which objects are first conceptualised as things of force - the *appearance* of
a thing is the appearance of *force's action*: a thing, in this sense, is
therefore a *happening* (a th-ing). Note the subtitle of the chapter,
*Appearance and the Supersensible World*: at the stage of understanding,
consciousness conceives of things as the appearances of supersensible essences;
and the form of these essences is force, or the unconditioned universal. Thus
while the chapter on perception characterised the common-sense 'manifest' image
of objects, the present chapter characterises a 'scientific' image, wherein
there is something *behind* what is manifest.[^30]

Because understanding thinks of its world of objects as a manifest image of a
non-perceptible, underlying scientific image, it therefore claims that its
objects are mere *representations*. Force is that which underlies these
representations; while perception ended up with two representations of the
object (being-for-itself and being-for-another, particular and universal), the
force of understanding is the 'metaphysical essence' of objects 'whose function
is to explain the unity of perceptual experience in terms of its being an
experience of particulars having individualized universal properties'.[^31]
Understanding is therefore a reflective stage of consciousness, since its
knowledge of things in themselves (that is, the things as they are determined by
their metaphysical essences, not by the way we represent them) is *mediated*,
relying on our ability to go beyond perceptual experience. Hegel's name for the
metaphysical basis of the understanding's representations is the **unconditioned
universal**.

To reiterate: since the thing in perception was left split into two parts,
being-for-itself and being-for-another, understanding attempts to heal this
division by positing the unconditioned universal, which can be understood as the
*being-as-such* of the thing. Expressed in this way, it sounds as though
understanding is the ultimate and comprehensive stage of consciousness; however,
the fact that hundreds of pages in the *Phenomenology* remain suggests that that
is not the case. What, then, is insufficient in the understanding? Well, to
start with, consciousness is not yet aware of itself as being conscious of its
object: 'in this movement consciousness only had the objective essence [that is,
the object] and not consciousness as such in its content, the result for
consciousness is to be posited [only] in its objective meaning'.[^32] Despite
the fact that the word 'objective' might usually signal an exhaustive account
for us, for Hegel, consciousness that grasps only *objective* essence is not
complete, since it thereby neglects the *subjective* - that is, consciousness
itself. Only when both objectivity and subjectivity have been united in the same
shape of consciousness can consciousness be the complete **concept**. This will
be the concern of the next section in the *Phenomenology*; for now, we will deal
with the intricacies of the understanding.

In contrast to self-certainty and perception, the focus of the understanding -
that is, the unconditioned universal - is a *thought*, rather than a sensuous,
empirical, perceivable thing. It is the result of a 'bringing together of
thought'.[^33] This is a necessity if perception is to be surpassed, because
while perception recognised the independence of things (each thing is a One
distinct from others), it fails to recognise the *causal dependence* of every
thing on every other thing, insofar as all things are part of one coherent
reality. Perception indeed *cannot* notice this dependence, because - as Hume
notes - causation is not a perceptible phenomenon. The understanding posits
force as the substance of things so that causation, and all other relations
between things, are real, *essential* parts of reality (as opposed to the
imperceptible and unessential elements of perceptual reality which led to the
aporia of perception). When things are understood as expressions of force, it is
a constitutive feature of them to 'reach outside' themselves; thus, the positing
force allows the totality of things to constitute an intelligible whole or
cosmos. This reaching-outside of things relates to Newton's Third Law of
motion:

> *To every Action there is always opposed an equal Reaction: or the mutual
> actions of two bodies upon each other are always equal, and directed to
> contrary parts.*[^34]

Just as, according to the Third Law, an object forcing itself upon another is
always met with an opposing force, so too is the thing of the understanding
asserted (in its independence, and its determinateness) by opposition to other
things. Independence thus requires dependence. In this way, the understanding
saves consciousness from the aporia of perception by comprehending the thing's
manifold *properties* (which, in perception, had led to a contradiction between
for-itself and for-another) as expressions of a *unified* substance (that is,
force).
