'Sensuous certainty' is the name for the intial kind of knowing an object;
specifically, the kind of knowing for which the object is *immediate*. Taking
any spatiotemporal thing as its object, sensuous-certainty has no limit as
regards its 'wealth', since it can take its object from anywhere in the infinite
boundaries of space and time, and can furthermore divide any such object into
more distinct objects. The object apprehended by sensuous-certainty is not only
immediate but *complete*, since nothing is taken away or added to it; instead,
it is laid before consciousness as *this* which *is*. In other words, it is
apprehended in its pure being. The apprehending consciousness, as well, is also
held in certainty, by itself, as another *this* which *is*; consequently, any
particular experience of sensuous-certainty takes the form: '*this* I, a
singular individual consciousness, knows *this* object, a singular individual
thing'. In the world of sensuous-certainty, there is no causality, no
unification, no essences or properties, no relations: there is merely the being
of manifold particulars. This is sensuous-certainty's claim to absolute
knowledge.

Clearly, then, while the strength of sensuous-certainty is in the *completeness*
of its object, its weakness is in the *abstractness* of its truth, since it
expresses nothing but the pure being of the object and of the consciousness
apprehending it. In fact, it is this abstractness and simplicity which reveals
to us the dialectic within sensuous-certainty. As a singular thing, the object
of sensuous-certainty is a *this* which is *here* and *now*. Each of these three
terms name the radical particularity of the thing. I have sensuous-certainty
*now* ... and yet, as soon as I have named this 'now', it is gone: the moment
has passed.  Likewise, if I face the thing, I can say that it is *here*, but if
I turn around, then while I can still refer to a 'here', it is no longer 'here'
that the thing in question is found. In both of these cases, the *Here* and
*Now* persevere, while the thing of which I had sensuous-certainty disappears.
That which we call 'now' is indifferent to whether it is 5:00 PM, 3:00 AM, or
any other time. Through every moment, the *Now* endures; it is *mediated*
through the moment. The moment is a particular expression of the *Now*, and the
location of sensuous-certainty is an expression of the *Here*. *Now* and *Here*
are thus *universals*. 'Now' means: *not* 5:00 PM, *not* 3:00 AM, *not* any
unique particular moment; as Hegel explains, 'As little as night and dary are
its being, it is just as much night and day. ... Such a simple is through
negation; it is neither this nor that, it is both a *not-this* and is just as
indifferent to being this or that, and such a simple is what we call a
*universal*'.[^1]

[^1]: G.W.F. Hegel, *The Phenomenology of Spirit*, translated by T. Pinkard.
  (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2018). ยง96.
