## Reason

### The Actualisation of Rational Self-Consciousness

Consciousness, who serves as the 'protagonist' of the *Phenomenology*, is still
an idealist at this stage. That is, we are still examining the increasingly
sophisticated ways in which rational consciousness tries to see reason in the
world. If we recall Robert Solomon's suggestion[^1] that Hegel's book consists
of *two* phenomenologies -- one of theory and one of practice -- then we can see
how the journey of observing reason was a recapitulation (albeit in a more
developed manner) of the development in the *Consciousness* chapter.[^2] But now
we are returning to the phenomenology of *practice* that begun in the
*Self-Consciousness* chapter; thus, the Reason that self-consciousness embodies
no longer wants simply to *find* rationality in the world, but to *actualise*
it: 'to engender itself by its own activity.'[^3] Through this process,
self-consciousness will work towards experiencing what **spirit** really is:
namely, 'The *I* that is *we* and the *we* that is *I*.'[^4]

Self-consciousness's *immediate* certainty of being all reality was shattered by
the emptiness of phrenology. The subject of this *Actualisation* chapter -- that
is, the consciousness whose development we (the phenomenologists) are observing
-- is the *free*, embodied self-consciousness that the phrenologist
unintentionally discovered. The subject (or 'rational self-consciousness') who
actualises herself in this chapter is precisely that which the judgment 'the
self is a thing' *failed* to consider. All of the rigidity and dead matter that
the phrenologist identified *as* individual spirit now serves as *negative
space*, drawing an outline around the living, *active* spirit of the individual.
Where the 'observer' character of the previous chapter was concerned with
observation, we are now concerned with *action*; where the observer was
concerned with the natural world, we are concerned with the **ethical** world.

This chapter is the beginning of the individual's genuine *action*, since the
genuine freedom that action requires was not to be found in *Self-Consciousness*
prior to *Reason*. The freedom of the stoic and skeptic was cut off from the
actual world, and the unhappy consciousness ended up giving up their freedom in
following the priest's instruction. A genuinely free individual (who is also
rational and embodied) is on the scene only now, as the unintentional
consequence of observational reason's failure. Now, this is not to say that
contemplation and desire play no role in human activity from this point forth;
rather, they are *incorporated* into the subject's more sophisticated activity:
that is, *action* and *actualisation*.

#### The Story of Subjectivity (So Far) {#story}

Since the actualisation of the subject (that is, the 'rational
self-consciousness') in this chapter parallels the development in the
*Self-Consciousness* chapter -- and since we have covered a long journey since
that chapter -- it might help to give a very brief summary of the latter.

Self-consciousness begins as the confident declaration that '*I am myself*' is
the most immediate certainty. In trying to assert itself, self-consciousness
went about *negating* other things, destroying or consuming them in acts of
desire.[^5] However, this cannot bring about long-term self-assertion and
satisfaction, because defining oneself against some non-I 'thing' requires the
thing to exist continuously -- and the negation of it prevents this from
happening. Self-consciousness realises that only a real Other -- that is,
*another self-consciousness* -- can offer the **recognition** that
self-assertion requires, because the Other has the capacity to negate
themselves, and to 'offer themselves up' to self-consciousness.[^6] This is what
leads to the famous relationship of master and slave (or 'mastery and
servitude'); after trying to defeat an Other in a fight for self-assertion (a
'trial by death'), self-consciousness becomes too fearful of dying, and wagers
that it is better to be enslaved to the Other than dead entirely.[^7]

As the relationship between master and slave plays out, the master eventually
realises that the denigrated slave is no longer a source of worthy recognition.
Meanwhile, the slave comes to find a new form of self-awareness through their
work: seeing themselves reflected in their work, the slave's self-consciousness
progresses beyond mere desire.[^8] This autonomy allows the slave, like
Epictetus, to become a stoic who finds freedom and self-assurance in *thinking*
rather than in the pain of enslaved labouring.[^9] However, the stoic becomes
literally lost in thought, tangled up in concepts without content, and is
thereby led towards *skepticism* which takes this abandonment of the world and
makes it *conscious*. The skeptical self-consciousness hopes to find its freedom
in *ataraxia*, an inner stability that comes from withholding all judgments
about the world.[^10] However, the skeptic quickly gets dizzy in its constant
contrarianism; and, more significantly, its *adherence* to nullifying everything
is never itself nullified! In this regard, skepticism manifests itself as a
self-contradictory self-consciousness, caught up in a performative
contradiction.[^11]

Since the chaos of skepticism makes *ataraxia* a seemingly unreachable goal,
self-consciousness becomes *unhappy* and posits the 'unchangeable' -- the
ataraxic, rational universal reality beyond appearances -- as something *beyond*
self-consciousness -- something *divine*.[^12] Now, like the master over the
slave, the unhappy consciousness denigrates their contingent (i.e. bodily)
existence with contempt; this is the first time in the *Phenomenology* that
'absolute negativity' is embodied. The unhappy consciousness looks for the
divine unchangeable on Earth, but finds that the planet is nothing but the grave
of God.[^13] The only hope that remains is for the subject to surrender their
freedom to the counsel and instruction of the 'priest': a figure who *mediates*
between the unhappy self-consciousness and the unchangeable God.[^14] This
mediation is what concludes the *Self-Consciousness* chapter and marks the birth
of *Reason* -- the Reason that, failing to find itself reflected in the world
through mere *observation*, now turns to action.

#### Ethos {#ethos}

The launch into active reason is a little bewildering, as the subject is no
longer a lonely adventurer who occasionally interacts with an Other in the form
of a master, a priest, or a criminal; now, 'the *realm of ethical life* opens
itself up.'[^15] This is a realm of (some kind of) community: namely, a society
of 'individuals in their self-sufficient *actuality*', possessing reason and an
awareness of other individuals around them. 'Ethical life' is *Sittlichkeit*, a
central term in Hegel's philosophy, deriving from *Sitte* which can be
translated into the Greek term *ethos*. Ethical life, for Hegel, can be
understood simply as the '**spiritual** *unity* of the essence of those
individuals' that make up a society.[^16]
