#### The Adventure of Individualism: Pleasure and Necessity {#pleas}

<blockquote class="epigraph">All theories, dear friend, are gray; the golden tree of life is green. <footer>Mephistopheles (Goethe's Faust, 1808)</footer></blockquote>

The pleasure-seeking individual is modelled on Goethe's Faust. At the time of
writing the *Phenomenology*, Hegel would not have read the same *Faust* as us;
prior to 1808, only a 'fragment' of the text existed. Nonetheless, he would have
been familiar with the story of the scholarly man Faust who, having grown
disillusioned with his philosophical and scientific knowledge, makes deals with
the devil (Mephistopheles) so that he can 'be done with peddling empty words'
and 'feel brave enough to venture forth and bear earth's torments and its
joys.'[^38] Ultimately, Faust wants to find true love; he seems to find this in
Gretchen, but the result of their relationship is ruin and shame.

Hegel's passage on *Pleasure and Necessity* therefore describes the alienated
individual's '*first purpose*': 'to become conscious of oneself as a singular
essence within that other self-consciousness, or to make this other into
itself.'[^39] This is Hegel's abstract way of describing a kind of love. The
individual desires 'the intuition of the unity of both self-sufficient
self-consciousnesses' -- for instance, the unity of Faust and Gretchen -- and is
thereby prepared to 'plunge into life'; they have abandoned 'the seemingly
heavenly spirit' of observational knowing and doing, and have succumbed to 'the
spirit of the earth'.[^40] This is a direct reference to the 'Erdgeist' in
*Faust*, which Hegel describes as 'a spirit to whom the only being which counts
as the true actuality is that of the actuality of singular consciousness.' The
individual is now concerned only with the particular, sensory things of this
world insofar as they might satisfy one's desire. Faust chooses the Earth over
Heaven because the Earth is the natural home of his body. It is for these
reasons that Kalkavage refers to pleasure-seeking individualism as 'the erotic
version of sense-certainty.'[^41]

Hegel describes the abandonment of observational reason with all the Romantic
grandeur that this individualist idolises: 'out of the motionless being of
thinking', the pleasure-seeker has 'the law of ethos and existence, together
with the skills related to observation and theory, only as a gray and gradually
vanishing shadow behind it'.[^42] 'The shadows cast by science, laws, and
principles, which alone stand between it and its own actuality, vanish like a
lifeless fog.'[^43]
