#### The Law of the Heart and the Insanity of Self-Conceit {#heart}

As it is with every stage of development in the *Phenomenology*, some
individuals may remain in the Faustian world of pleasure and necessity. The
movement to this new kind of individualism, of 'the law of the heart', is not
necessary. 'The hedonist might well stay a hedonist, increasingly jaded and
self-destructive', Robert Solomon writes; 'he or she might become an absurdist,
a sadist, retreat to the asceticism of "Unhappy Consciousness" or throw oneself
into work or join the marines to learn some "discipline".'[^51] The
individualist that refuses to succumb to their failures, however, attempts to
cope with necessity by adopting it for *themselves*. On an immediate, emotional
level, this individualist 'knows that it has the *universal*, or the *law*,
within itself'.[^52] This is the **law of the heart**, the conviction of the
Romantics which blames society for the tragedy of pleasure and necessity and
insists that the search for pleasure, emotion, and passion is a *natural* law. I
will accordingly refer to the individualist self-consciousness in this stage as
*the Romantic*.

Adamant that the heart rules above all else, the Romantic claims that
'actuality' -- that is, the society they live in, along with its ethos and laws
-- is 'a violent order of the world' that oppresses the individual, and is at
the same time 'humanity suffering under that order, ... subjected to an alien
necessity.'[^53] The Romantic has a paternalistic ethic, hating the law of
existing society and opposing it with their own passionate law -- which, of
course, is unactualised and amounts to very little outside the realm of the
emotions and immediate feelings. The aim, therefore, is to actualise the law of
the heart and restore the People to the natural bliss of freedom. Think of
Rousseau, the predecessor of all Romantics, and his declaration: 'Man was born
free, and everywhere he is in chains.'[^54] While Romanticism marks a
development from Faustian individualism, it seems that Hegel regards it as
driven by pleasure-seeking. For the Romantic, he claims, there is no higher
pleasure than that of the brave liberator who destroys these chains, who 'seeks
their pleasure in the exhibition of their own *admirably excellent* essence and
in authoring the *welfare of mankind*.'[^55] (Hegel's sarcasm here is a hint of
his general attitude towards Romantics.)

What happens if the Romantic manages to actualise their law? What happens when
the law of the heart 'becomes an actuality which is in and for itself lawful'
and binding on society?[^56] The result is that 'the law *escapes* the
individual'; a law of the heart is no longer *of the heart* if it is transformed
from a private feeling into a public order. The validity of the law was its tie
to a particular heart, a particular feeling; consequently, as Hyppolite writes,
'No sooner is it actualized than it escapes the particular heart that gave it
life.'[^57] A Romantic can work to liberate The People according to their
heartfelt law, but as soon as the 'liberation' is carried out, the law is no
longer their own, and they are just as alienated as those they sought to
emancipate. What the Romantic really 'authors' is 'his own entanglement in the
actual order ... he is entangled in an order which is not only alien to him but
which is also a hostile dominance.'[^58] Yet again, an attempt at individualist
subversion ends in the *loss* of individuality.

Furthermore, there is a strange contradiction of singularity and universality in
the Romantic. On the one hand, the *content* of the law of the heart is
individuality (of emotion, feeling, etc.) wanting to preserve its singularity;
on the other hand, for the law of the heart to be valid and legitimately lawful,
'*every heart* must recognize *itself* in the law.'[^59] The result of this
contradiction, of the attempt to render a particular as universal is that,
*universally*, everyone follows their own *particular* law of the heart. In a
way, Kant had already thought of this kind of criticism. Targeting Hume and the
utilitarians, for whom moral judgment is based upon upon the weight of emotions
and desires, he writes:

> It is, therefore, strange that intelligent men could have thought of passing
> off the desire for happiness as a universal *practical law* on the ground that
> the desire, and so too the *maxim* by which each makes this desire the
> determining ground of his will, is universal. For whereas elsewhere a
> universal law of nature makes everything harmonious, here, ... the most
> extreme opposite of harmony would follow. ... For then the will of all has not
> one and the same object but each has his own (his own welfare).[^61]

Everyone follows their own heartfelt pleasure, and thus explicitly turns against
the 'law' that the Romantic had imagined. The heart has betrayed itself; its law
is the very basis on which it permits everyone else to *contradict* its law!
What emerges is a relativistic situation; everyone in this situation, Harris
remarks, is legitimised in saying:

> Why should *that* have priority? ... You say that it is really the welfare of
> humanity that you care about; but so do we. And we can see that you are
> actually on the *wrong* side.[^60]

From this experience, consciousness learns that society is not a 'dead
necessity', a mere actuality to be shaped by a willing individual. Rather, it is
a universal, 'brought to life' by the individuals which it engulfs and alienates
from themselves.[^62] The Romantic is shocked by the revelation that 'actuality
is a living order'; 'society is not like a block of marble to be chiselled by an
individual', but a totality that consumes the individuals that animate it.[^63]

This is where the 'insanity of self-conceit' sets in. The Romantic still lives
in a contradiction, where 'actuality' of law turns into 'non-actuality',
'essence' into 'non-essence', and so on; so, in a desperate attempt to cope with
this contradiction, they blame all of society's ills on the individuals that
make it up. It is their fault, the Romantic thinks, for not following *my*
heart. 'The heart-throb for the welfare of mankind therefore passes over into
the bluster of a mad self-conceit.'[^64] The Romantic understands now that
society is not a simple unity with its own pre-given order, and that it is
comprised of (reasonably) free individuals; and yet, they have no shame in
angrily blaming these individuals for the contradiction that they live in: 'the
universal order is an inversion' to the mad Romantic, 'completely fabricated by
fanatical priests and gluttonous despots, along with their various lackeys.'

This insanity cannot last forever. Blaming 'priests and despots' doesn't solve
the Romantic's problem, which remains the same: the law of the heart -- the
*Romantic's* heart, in *particular* -- remains unactualised. And yet, the
Romantic thinks, it was the attempt to actualise my law that led me into this
mess! The gluttony of the despots, the fanaticism of the priests ... this was
all permitted by 'the law of the heart'. With this realisation, the Romantic
'experiences instead [their] law as non-actual and the non-actuality as [their]
own actuality.'[^65] In other words, they realise their own involvement in the
'perversity' they see around them: 'To be sure, the social order is the work of
individuality, but not of a particular individuality: it is the immediate result
of the *interplay* of individuals.'[^66]

As the assuredness of Romanticism begins to fade away, a new picture of society
emerges. In this picture, society is the universal that emerges from all of its
individuals freely acting on the law of their own heart; 'What seems to be the
public *order* is therefore this universal feud within which each in itself
wrests for himself what he can.'[^67] Society is stable on the surface, but
beneath this stability is the 'war of all against all' that Hobbes described;
society 'has for its content restless individuality, for which opinion or
singularity is law.'[^68] This state of affairs is what Hegel calls the
*Weltlauf*, the **way of the world**, or the 'rat race', as Harris refers to
it.[^69]
