#### Virtue and the Way of the World {#virtu}

To introduce this final stage of self-actualisation, Hegel looks at the
development of this chapter as a whole with regards to its logical
structure.[^70] In *Pleasure and Necessity*, we had a simple opposition of
individuality (the pleasure-seeker) and universality (social norms). In *The Law
of the Heart*, the structure was more complex: the Romantic represented an
'immediate unity' of individuality and universality, since the universal moral
law was derived from their individual heart. The rest of society, from the
perspective of the Romantic, represented an *opposition* of individuality and
universality: the innocent individual being repressed by the 'violent order' of
society. In the present stage of *virtue* we are confronted with a character
who, dismayed by the chaos and rampant individualism of the way of the world,
looks to *suppress* their individuality and let themselves be guided by a
universal standard of virtue. Logically speaking, we find an individual who aims
to let universality *sublate* individuality; for the rest of society (those who
partake in the way of the world), universality is sublated by individuality: the
individual 'is the essence' of life.

Virtue is thus a rejection of the individualistic forms of self-actualisation
that preceded it, a rejection of the idea that the law has a relation to one's
personal whims. The position of the 'knight of virtue' is therefore rather
paradoxical: since the success of virtue is the *overcoming* of individuality,
there will be no individual to celebrate this success should it take place. The
knight of virtue 'engages with the way of the world; but its purpose and true
essence lie in *defeating the actuality* of the way of the world. As a result,
the existence of the good which is thereby brought about is the *cessation of
its doing*.'[^71] The knight of virtue is an individual against individuality;
their goal is to remove themselves from the picture. Moreover, since the 'true
essence' of virtue -- that is, a world in which everyone is virtuous -- is not
yet actual, and since it stands completely outside the domain of individuality,
the knight of virtue 'only *has faith in*' the possibility of global
virtuousness.[^72] Put together, the self-sacrificing goal of the knight of
virtue and the inherent uncertainty in this goal make the quest for virtue a
remarkably different kind of self-actualisation to the previous two kinds.

The knight of virtue's faith in the possibility of a virtuous world is based on
the assumption that, in itself, the way of the world is good. Only in the
*actual*, perverted state of the world is society corrupted by vice. (In this
regard at least, in its belief in humanity's inherent goodness, virtue is
comparable with the previous stages of self-actualisation.) Here is where the
real difficulties arise. To start with, the knight is unwittingly *relying* upon
the way of the world in order to criticise it: 'Virtue wants the world to be
good,' Inwood writes, 'but it only knows what this amounts to from the
dispositions already [supposedly] inherent in the world.'[^73] Moreover, how is
the knight supposed to encourage virtue and attack vice, when the target of the
attack is supposedly good *in itself*? Though virtue wants to attack the way of
the world as vicious and misguided, it is forced to recognise that the way of
the world is indeed the actuality -- the *real* manifestation -- of a true good.

> Where virtue comes to grips with the way of the world, it always meets with
> those places which are themselves the existence of the good. It is the good,
> which as the *in-itself* of the way of the world is inseparably intertwined
> with everything in the appearance of the way of the world, and which also has
> its existence in the actuality of the way of the world. For virtue, the way of
> the world is thus invulnerable.[^74]

The central paradox for the knight of virtue is, therefore: to act, to enter the
social and political arena, would be to bloody the clean sword of virtue.
'Virtue is not only like the combatant whose sole concern in the fight is to
keep his sword shiny', Hegel writes; 'rather, it was in order to preserve its
weapons [virtues, that is] that virtue started the fight.' The quest to impose
virtue on the world, to eliminate individuality and the chaotic way of the
world, is thus nothing more than 'shadow-boxing' (*Spiegelfechterei*, literally
'fencing at mirrors').[^75]

Hegel takes his criticism further. Not only is the knight of virtue's project
doomed to inactivity, but it is incoherent at its very core. The 'virtue' that
is supposedly waiting to guide our lives is an 'abstract non-actual *essence*'
-- that is, a mere *idea* regarding human living, existing only for
consciousness. But what good is such an idea if it has nothing corresponding to
it in real, *actual* social life? We saw this criticism previously in the
chapter on phrenology: to posit an inherent 'disposition' in a human is of no
consequence if it has no concrete bearing on the behaviour of the human.[^76] If
the knight of virtue is to respond by saying that the inherent goodness of
humanity *can* be actualised, if we would only overcome our attachment to
individuality, then we need only ask: what is actuality, in a social context, if
not that which is carried out and enabled *by individuals*? The knight of virtue
differentiates between what is 'in-itself' and what *is*, but the 'in-itself' is
nothing unless it is actualised as what *is*. In Hegel's words, 'Virtue wanted
to consist in bringing the good to *actuality* through the *sacrifice of
individuality*, but the aspect of *actuality* is itself nothing but the aspect
of *individuality*.'[^77]

The way of the world wins the 'fight' against virtue, then, but Hegel doesn't
regard this win as particularly impressive. The knight of virtue's only weapon
was 'empy words which elevate the heart but leave reason empty; they edify but
erect nothing.'[^78] This is not a difficult opponent to defeat, then.

At this point, towards the end of his critique of virtue, Hegel distinguishes
between ancient virtue and the virtue of Reason; it is only the latter that he
is criticising. 'Ancient virtue had its own determinate, secure meaning', he
writes, 'since it had its *basis*, *itself rich in content*, in the *substance*
of the people, and it had an *actual*, *already existing good* for its
purpose.'[^79] Aristotle acknowledged that virtue comes not from the 'nature' of
humanity in-itself, but from the actual *habits* of individuals; Confucius, who
Hegel unfairly dismissed, analysed virtue by observing the behaviour of others
and attempting to understand them on the basis of this actual behaviour.[^80]
