## Reason

### Observing Reason

This first of three major sections of the *Phenomenology*'s epic account of
Reason is the rational consciousness's first attempt to 'raise its certainty
into truth, and to fulfill the empty mine.'[^1] The abstractions of the Kantian
and Fichtean systems are to be overcome: now, reason wants to really reach into
the world and understand it for itself. The world is no longer a simple object
to be hopelessly grasped, as it was for consciousness (in sensuous certainty,
perception, and so on). Instead, in Jean Hyppolite's words, this braver stage of
reason 'is interested not in the sensuous as such but in the concept that
resides in the sensuous.'[^2] By *thinking* through nature and the sensuous
world, understanding it as *inherently conceptual*, reason will find itself in
the world. Whereas, in the stages of consciousness, the subject was content to
merely stand before the world, naïvely 'taking it in', it has now developed the
capacity to *reach out* to the world, *will* itself towards knowing it, and so
on. This is what permits the earlier summary of Reason as the stage at which the
subject's activity is defined by *mediation*. The opening paragraph of
*Observing Reason* is remarkably clear, and contains multiple clues for how this
mediating relationship with the world will play out:

> Formerly, it just happened to consciousness that it perceived and
> *experienced* quite a bit in the thing; however, here it itself makes the
> observations and engages the experience. ... Reason thus now has a universal
> *interest* in the world because it is the certainty of having its present
> moment in the world, or is certain that the present is rational. It seeks its
> other, while knowing that it possesses nothing else in that other but itself;
> it seeks only its own infinity.[^3]

Of course, the *Phenomenology* is ultimately populated by a sequence of
*failures*; consequently, in the very next paragraph, Hegel explains how
observing reason will eventually fall. Its goal, as we have established, is to
*engage* the world, mediate between subject and nature, and thereby feel at home
in the world, and *among* the world: that is, to not be an individual
abstraction, as the I of Kant and Fichte was. However,

> if reason rummages around through all the innards of things, and opens all
> their veins so that reason might encounter itself gushing out from them, then
> it will have no luck; rather, it must at an earlier point have perfected
> itself inwardly in order to be able to experience its perfection.[^4]

In other words, the observer (this is the name I will give to our current
character) will eventually come to find that it cannot find itself in the world
of things while it still has an underdeveloped notion of its own selfhood. Or,
as Kalkavage puts it, 'thinghood as observation conceives it (thinghood as
nature) is an inappropriate vessel for the self, whose true nature observing
reason does not know.'[^5] When this 'vessel' proves to be insufficient, reason
will turn to the *practical* realm of 'self-actualisation' in order to know
itself. Hegel makes this point himself, when he introduces the three divisions
of *Observing Reason*, and gives a clue to what follows them:

> What observing reason is doing is to be examined in the moments of its
> movement as it incorporates nature, spirit, and, finally, the relation of both
> as sensuous being, and when as an existing actuality, it seeks itself.[^6]

#### Observation of Nature {#natur}

<blockquote class="epigraph">O chestnut tree, great rooted blossomer, / Are you the leaf, the blossom or the bole?<footer>W.B. Yeats, *Among School Children*, 1926</footer></blockquote>

At the outset, the observer thinks in the tradition of Francis Bacon, working as
an 'unthinking consciousness.' Hegel does not mean this in a straightforwardly
disparaging way; rather, he means that the observer is engaged in a naïve kind
of empiricism, which deludes itself into thinking that it relies on observation
-- 'tasting, smelling, feeling, hearing, and seeing' -- alone.[^7] The naïvety
of this position is that it has forgotten the role that consciousness plays in
determining the objects of experience. As Kant wrote in his *Prolegomena*, a
'given intuition must be subsumed under a concept which determines the form of
judging in general' in order to count as *experience* and actually contribute to
our knowledge of the world.[^8] The observer cannot simply sit and gaze at the
world if it wishes to actually observe it. An empiricist like Bacon thus
undermines the role that thought (or, for Kant, the understanding specifically)
plays in their observation of the world. This consciousness is 'unthinking' in
the sense that it represses its own thought. (Think also of Hume's denial of the
substantial self, on the basis of it not showing up as an impression). To
illustrate this point simply, we know, since the passage from sensuous certainty
to perception, that any attempt at grasping a sensuous *this* always gives way
to an unintended universal. Hegel makes the same point again here: 'the meaning
of what is perceived should at least be that of a *universal*, not a *sensuous
this*.'

At first, this universal is just what consciousness finds to be stable in the
movement of the observed world. As a cloud floats through the sky, slowly
undulating into different shapes, I nonetheless recognise that it is the same
cloud, 'the uniform repetition of the same *doing*.' At this stage, I have this
recognition because I -- the observer -- have a **memory** of the cloud's
movement and transformation, and through my memories of it, I can identify what
remains. This memory is what serves as the universal. As such, Hegel explains,
the observer 'must shift the responsibility to *itself* for the real movement of
the universal.'[^9] That is, universality on this account belongs only to the
observer's *description* of the world, 'without the sensuous having in itself
become a universal.' The problem with this is captured by Hegel's phrase, 'the
indeterminateness of the universal': when it is up to me and my memory to
identify universals in things, there is no criterion *in the things* for how
these universals are identified. Amid the wealth of the observable universe, how
are the lines between discrete 'things' to be drawn? The observer is left with
an 'endless *particularization* of the chaotic range of animals and plants,
mountain ranges, metals, earth, etc.'[^10] Within this 'inexhaustible supply for
observing and describing', the observer can hypothetically go on classifying
forever. By use of its memory, it can take anything to be a universal; as such,
'it can no longer know whether what seems to have being in itself is not a
contingency.'[^11]

In this overwhelming and endless game of classification, the observer comes
across a sign that it has not 'advance[d] into *sensuous perceiving*'.
Specifically, the observing consciousness ends up with a distinction between
'what enables things to be *known*' -- that is, the aspects of observed objects
that end up in the memory, ready to be classed as universals -- and 'the
left-over range of sensuous properties, something which the thing itself cannot
do without but from which consciousness exempts itself.'[^12] This distinction
essentially gives us another form of the thing-in-itself: this time, in
Kalkavage's words, consciousness 'is aware that its ideas may be no more than
mental constructs.'[^13] It is able to recognise the difference between the
essential and inessential aspects of a thing, but with this recognition comes
also a 'wavering back and forth about whether what is essential and necessary
for *cognition* can also be said to be in *the things*.'[^14] This is a major
problem for a rational observer, who is so preoccupied with finding reason
not just within themselves but also within the world.

Consequently, observing reason quickly looks for a solution to this 'wavering'.
In this search, it realises that anything that is cognised as 'essential' can
only be cognised as such if it counts as 'that through which [things] *break
free* from the universal continuity of being as such, *cut* themselves *loose*
from others, and be *for themselves*.'[^15] That is, if a thing is recognised by
consciousness as a distinct 'thing' at all, it must be thanks to certain
elements of that thing which, regardless of any observation, make the thing
distinct among the rest of the world (or, what Hegel elegantly calls 'the
universal continuity of being'). In still other words, that which separates an
object to the observer must have already separated the object *from other
objects*. In illustrating this point, Hegel turns to the example of taxonomy,
where he clearly has Linnaeus in mind:

> The distinguishing marks of animals, for example, are taken from their claws
> and teeth. Indeed, not only does cognition *distinguish* one animal from
> another by this means, but it is by these means that the animal itself
> *separates* itself off from others. It is through these weapons that it
> preserves itself *for itself* and keeps itself detached from the
> universal.[^16]

Now, Hegel realises that not all objects are animals; that is, not all objects
'get as far' as *being-for-themselves*. Plants have no 'intention' or will to
survive; the only 'distinguishing marks' that Hegel finds in them arise from
their *'dividing themselves in two'* in sexual differentiation.[^17] This limit
in distinction, he explains, is what makes plants harder *for us* to distinguish
from one another, in comparison to animals. However, 'at an even lower level' --
i.e., the level of chemical objects -- things make no 'effort' to distinguish
themselves at all; often, they dissolve into one another and change form
constantly. Such an object 'cannot itself any longer differentiate itself from
an other'. It is seemingly a different thing when it is *'motionless'* to when
it is *'in relationships'*; in this difference, we see the world of constant
flux that Heraclitus described. Accordingly, the wavering question -- of whether
our cognition is really grasping what the observed objects *actually are* --
arises again. There is movement in the world that the observer's account of
universals cannot account for. A memory does not move.

#### Observation of Nature: Laws of Nature {#laws}

The only way to overcome this problem is to form a new account of the universal
-- one which won't hope for '*inert* determinateness', but instead will expect
precisely what it sees in the observed world: that is, the *shifting* of
determinacy. The truth of determinateness, Hegel explains, is *'its relating
itself to its opposite.'*[^18] The 'instinct of reason' pushes the observer now
to look not merely for 'determinatenesses' in the form of 'distinguishing
marks', but for the **laws** that govern the *relating* of these
determinatenesses to one another -- that is, the laws of their *movement*. A
classification of all things, a catalogue of every object, is not possible, but
a set of concepts -- laws -- that govern these things seems more achievable.
This development of reason is parallel to the previous development of
consciousness from perception to the understanding.

What is a law in this context? And how does it come about? Following Harris, we
can use the story of Plato and Diogenes the Cynic to exemplify the observer's
sense of a law. This is how Diogenes Laërtius tells the story:

> Plato had defined Man as an animal, biped and featherless, and was applauded.
> Diogenes plucked a fowl and brought it into the lecture-room with the words,
> 'Here is Plato's man.' In consequence of which there was added to the
> definition, 'having broad nails.'[^19]

In this story, Plato looks for a 'law' or concept to govern the universal, 'Man'
(that is, the human). He bases this law on what Hegel calls 'those
distinguishing marks, which for each of them essentially consists in not
existing for itself but in passing over into its opposite.'[^20] When Diogenes
shows that Plato's concept is too lose to define humans alone, the concept is
adapted on the basis of further distinguishing marks. Diogenes's action, more
than simply mocking Plato, says something in general about our current
conception of law. The observer is still an avowed empiricist, establishing its
laws and concepts on the basis of experience; as Hegel says, 'the *truth of the
law* is in *experience* in the way that *sensuous being* is'.[^21] The problem
in this strategy is that there might always be a Diogenes who enters the scene
and, in his dirty hands, shows us an exception to our law. No matter how much we
refine our concepts and laws, they will never have *necessity* if they are based
on the contingencies found in observation. A law that is based in such a way,
Hegel admits, is 'not really a law.'

The problem the observer now faces is this: without room for necessity, a law
cannot be a law; however, without room for *contingency*, a law has nothing to
govern. The current sense of law, based simply on observation of contingencies,
clearly has no room for necessity. But this problem doesn't have to last, Hegel
explains.

> However, the law's being a concept not only does not conflict with its being
> available for observation, but is rather the very reason it is in possession
> of necessary *existence* [*Dasein*], and is for observation. The universal in
> the sense of a *rational universality* is also the universal in the previous
> sense of its exhibiting itself *for that* consciousness as what is current and
> actual ... but without thereby losing its nature and falling back down into
> inert stable existence or indifferent succession.[^22]

In these sentences, Hegel is basically claiming that it is possible for
necessity (that is, *universality*) to be found *within* the contingency of the
observer's experience. When he claims that 'the concept presents itself in the
mode of thinghood', he is explaining that the contingent things of our
experience are, in fact, the *manifestation* of the conceptual, lawlike, and
*rational* side of reality. When 'concept' is understood as what he calls
'*rational* universality', it is understood not as the artificial *abstraction*
from observed things, but as the genuine *reality* of what those things *are*.
*Law*, then, is the recognition of the inherent link between rational
universality and the world we observe: if the latter did not have rational
universality as its very reality, it would not be possible to make sense of it
at all. As such, Hegel makes a profound and aphoristic statement:

> What *ought* to be is also in fact what *is*.[^23]

This statement might sound illegitimate, but only if it isn't properly thought
through. It is, in one sense, a critique of the Kantian tradition's postulation
that there is a 'noumenal' world that, despite having no presence in possible
experience, 'is the standard of "pure Reason" by which the phenomenal world of
"experience" is to be judged', as Harris puts it.[^24] As far as *actual
experience* goes, the noumenon is a concept which 'only *should* be, but is
not'; and a concept of this sort, Hegel says, 'has no real truth'.[^25] Our laws
and concepts of the world are of no use whatsoever if we don't find their truth
within reality. Accordingly, the observer is now at the stage of asserting that
'the truth of the law is essentially *reality*.'[^26] Laws are no longer
established by generalising and abstracting from singular observations, but
instead through *experimentation* and inductive reasoning about the observed
world. Francis Bacon himself wrote that 'we regard induction as the form of
demonstration which respects the senses, stays close to nature, fosters results
and is almost involved in them itself'; it is likely that, at this point, Hegel
has projects such as Bacon's in mind.[^27]

As he goes on, Hegel admits that, so long as consciousness 'sticks to
observation', there is a tension between its new conception of law as
'essentially *reality*' and 'the universal in itself'. Indeed, he says, such a
thing as [the observer's] law is not an essence that stems from reason.'[^28]
For an observer that wants to find reason in itself and in the world, this is a
major problem. It arises because, through what we can call the observer's
'inductive method', consciousness is forced to concede that not '*all singular*
sensuous things must have provided evidence for the appearance of law in order
for it to be able to assert the truth of the law.'[^29] This is an intuitive
point about inductive reason, wherein Hegel is echoing Hume. 'Laws' of the
inductive method are arrived at through experimentation; but it is impossible to
arrive at a truly universal law by experimenting on *all* objects. Newton didn't
theorise about gravity by watching *every* apple fall. Instead, inductive reason
arrives only at *probability*, which is not truth. As Hegel says bluntly, 'let
the probability be as great as it may, vis-à-vis truth, it is nothing.'

However, Hegel also acknowledges that, in the actual practice of science, the
inductive method arrives at laws that are firmer than mere generalisations on
the basis of some experimentation. He uses gravity as an example:

> That 'the stone falls' is, to that [observing] consciousness, true because, to
> consciousness, the stone is *heavy*, which is to say, because in its weight
> the stone has *in and for itself* an essential relation *to the earth* which
> is expressed in its falling.[^30]

Though he is not quite explicit about it, what Hegel means to say here is that
inductive law *can* work when the experimenting observer has established not
only the applicability of the law (i.e., its demonstration in experiments), but
also the intelligibility of the law -- that is, an explanation for it. When the
scientist arrives at a basic law of gravity, for instance, they are not just
giving a mere generalisation or 'analogy' drawn from the observation of many
objects behaving the same way (that is, *falling*); in addition, they are giving
an theoretical -- that is, *conceptual* -- explanation of why this behaviour
happens. When the law is understood in these *two* aspects, then it is 'true, to
itself', Hegel writes. 'The law counts as law because it exhibits itself in
appearance and at the same time is in itself the concept.'

Interestingly, Hegel mentions that it is again 'the instinct of reason' that
leads to this more sophisticated account of law; consciousness 'necessarily sets
itself to *purifying* the law and its moments *into concepts* but without
knowing that this is what it wants to do'.[^31] In this process, the concept
which constitutes the nature of an object -- that is, the *rational* aspect of
the object -- begins 'as sunken into empirical material'; it is the scientific
process of experimentation that draws out this concept, by abstracting from the
singular objects of empirical material. Since the observer is now more
interested in concepts than in singular objects, it is increasingly focused on
the realm of the universal: the concepts that arise in scientific research --
Hegel gives the examples of positive and negative electricity, and acids and
bases -- 'cannot last on their own, like a tooth or a claw, and be pointed out
in that way.'[^32] Instead, they 'have truth only in being *universal*.' The
work of the observer 'frees the predicates from their subjects.' However, the
observer carries this process out 'without knowing'. That is, it still
attributes the conceptual content of the law to *consciousness itself*, and does
not recognise the reason that is inherent in the *world*. For this reason, the
observer has gone from one one-sided perspective to another: from a grasping of
only empirical contingencies, to a grasping of 'matters' (acids, bases,
calories, degrees of heat, etc.), which are neither sensuous objects nor
properties of such objects.[^33] A 'matter' of this kind is, in Hegel's words,
'a non-sensuous sensuousness, an incorporeal and nonetheless objective
being.'[^34] Basically, as Kalkavage puts it, 'reason has failed to find an
embodied universal.'[^35]

#### Observation of Nature: The Organic {#organ}

<blockquote class="epigraph">Nature is what we know -- / Yet have no art to say -- / So impotent Our Wisdom is / To her Simplicity. <footer>Emily Dickinson, *The Single Hound*, 1914</footer></blockquote>

In failing to find an embodied universal, and instead finding a pure law,
standing free from the sensuous, consciousness proves that 'the *truth* of
observation is non-observable reality.'[^36] Its new object is *revealed* in
worldly experience, but is not actually *bound up* in the sensuous world. As
Hyppolite puts it elegantly,

> It is as if an experiment were a *sensuous conception*, an elaboration of the
> sensuous which reveals in it the necessity of the concept. It raises the
> concept, which had been submerged in being, and makes it appear as what it is:
> the dynamism of nature, rather than the static universal of description or
> classification.[^37]

Law had previously fallen apart when the objects it was supposed to govern were
lost in their transformations. A chemical would be transformed in reaction and
no longer be grasped by the same law. Now, however, the observer is prepared to
understand law 'as the unity of a process which preserves itself in its
becoming-other.'[^38] The name for the new *object* of consciousness -- the
object which is understood through this law -- is the **organic**, or the
organism. An organism in this sense is, simply put, a worldly thing *grasped in
the context* of 'the dynamism of nature' and the 'process' of 'becoming-other'.
The organic worldview is a major theme for Hegel, and it is introduced right at
the beginning of the *Phenomenology*, in a beautiful passage in the preface:

> The bud disappears when the blossom breaks through, and one might say that the
> former is refuted by the latter. Likewise, through the fruit, the blossom
> itself may be declared to be a false existence of the plant, since the fruit
> emerges as the blossom's truth as it comes to replace the blossom itself.
> These forms are not only distinguished from each other, but, as incompatible
> with each other, they also supplant each other. However, at the same time
> their fluid nature makes them into moments of an organic unity in which they
> are not only not in conflict with each other, but rather, one is equally as
> necessary as the other, and it is this equal necessity which alone constitutes
> the life of the whole.[^39]

An inorganic account of the world, such as the one held by mechanistic
philosophers like Descartes, cannot comprehend the 'absolute fluidity' of the
world. When Descartes notices a piece of wax change colour and lose its scent
and shape when held near a fire, he concludes that nothing is really *essential*
to the wax but 'that it is something extended, flexible, and mutable.'[^40] On
the other hand, when an object is grasped as organic, 'all the determinatenesses
through which it is open to others are bound together under the simple organic
unity. None of them come forward as essential, or as items that could relate
themselves free-standingly to others, and the organic thus preserves itself in
its relation.'[^41] That is to say, an organic object does not dissolve as soon
as it enters in relations with other beings (and thereby undergoes
transformations). An organism is *inherently dynamic*: being in relations is not
a threat to its persevering existence. The organism *maintains itself*; this is
what it means, after all, to be alive. One final way of illustrating what an
organism is comes from Harris, who says that 'the inorganic thing exists "in
itself" in the totality of ways in which it exists "for another"'; while, on the
other hand, 'the organism exists primitively "for itself".'[^42] His example for
this distinction is the difference between a human and a glass bottle falling
from a great height: while the bottle 'falls as it must' and *inevitably*
shatters, losing its form completely, the outcome of a human's fall is dependent
on some *effort* taken to land on one's feet. The human shows itself as an
organism in the way it uses its internal capacities to (try to) maintain itself.

In the first moments of the observer's discovery of organic nature, the instinct
of reason leads it towards the observation of *'aspects of law'* that govern the
relation of organic nature to inorganic nature. The inorganic nature that the
observer is focused on here is the **environment** that organisms live in: the
'air, water, earth, zones, and climate' are Hegel's 'elemental' examples.[^43]
In the process of maintaining and developing itself -- that is, the process of
*Bildung* -- an organism must *internally* respond to the *external*
environment. As such, a system of laws based on such responses will claim that
the environment in which an organism develops is the determining factor of what
that organism *is* and *can be*. The weakness of this kind of law is found
quickly, however, once we see that it 'does not correspond to the diversity of
the organic'.[^44] One might devise a law that 'animals in northerly latitudes
have thick coats of fur', for instance, but the law will quickly be falsified.
Hegel also points out that the *freedom* that is inherent to organisms also
allows them to wilfully 'exempt' themselves from the determinations of their
environment. Consequently, the role of the environment is nothing more than an
'influence', and 'one does not know what really belongs to this influence and
what does not.' Yet again, the observer has devised a law that isn't really a
law, since it doesn't 'exhaust the range of the organic.'[^45]

Ultimately, the 'environmental influence' model of law fails because the
relation between organism and environment holds no *necessity*. Hegel
illustrates this point neatly:

> as often as a coat of fur may be *found* to go together with northerly
> latitudes, ... nevertheless the concept of a thick covering of fur is not
> contained in the concept of the north.[^46]

In fact, in the way it is posited by the observer, the organism-environment
relation is better described as 'a teleological relation': it is *external* to
what is related and is effectively imposed upon the relata by the observer. In
Harris's words, 'it operates upon the lawful order from outside, and from
"above" it, like the sculptor turning his block of marble into a statue.'[^47]
Organisms only appear to be 'designed' for their environments if we are
intentionally ignorant of the organisms that are *exceptions* to this apparent
design.

The law of 'adaptation' was based on an *external teleology*; that is, a concept
of an organism's relation to its environment which 'seems to fall outside the
bounds of the organic' (and the environment). Residing in neither element, it
couldn't be observed, and couldn't hold any necessity. Some kind of teleology
can be retained, however, if it is found *within* the organism; that is, if the
observer realises that 'the organic is in fact the real purpose itself.'[^48]
This is a more familiar account of teleology for those who are familiar with
Aristotle, and it was also understood by Kant, who recognised the organism as
'an *organized* and *self-organizing* being'.[^49] Nothing truly 'new' is born
in the organism; rather, the organism undergoes changes for the sake of
preserving what it is.

> The organic does not produce something, it only *conserves itself*, or what is
> produced is, as it is produced, just as much already present.[^50]

At this stage, then, the observer finds that organisms undergo changes, and
develop their 'distinguishing marks', by the internal concept of **purpose**
[*Zweck*] that drives them to self-conservation. This is a significant moment
since, in the preface, Hegel referred to *reason* as '*purposive* doing.'[^51]
Laws of purpose are the of the kind that appear in Pindar and Nietzsche:
*'become what you are'*.[^52] Only *'at the end'*, Hegel explains, is it
retroactively revealed that an organism's whole process of change was a
necessary process of *becoming*, rather than one of mere transformation:
'nothing else emerges other than what was already there.'[^53]

Now that the observing consciousness of reason has grasped some kind of purpose
in organic nature, reason is closer to seeing itself reflected in the world.
Nonetheless, reason's journey is still incomplete, as it 'does not recognize
itself in what it finds' in nature.[^54] That is, though reason has managed to
find itself in the world, it is still driven only by *instinct*; it isn't
self-conscious of what it is trying to do, and thus remains ignorant of it. Now,
'instinct' is the subjective experience of what, objectively, we call *purpose*.
This is why the observer is not yet aware of discovering itself (as reason) in
the world: because it is only being guided by blind instinct, it fails to
reflect on itself and realise that this instinct, this *drive*, is itself
evidence of some 'purpose'.

The theological 'argument from design', made by figures like Aquinas or William
Paley, makes the mistake of assuming that purpose-driven nature requires some
superior intelligent being directing this purpose. At this stage of observing
reason, consciousness makes a similar mistake. Instead of arguing that it is
*God* who bestows purpose onto nature, however, the observer might instead
assume that all purpose is projected onto nature by *itself*. Either way,
observing consciousness refuses to accept that purpose is *within* organisms,
and instead recognises it as given unto them: the observer 'makes a distinction
between the concept of purpose ... and self-preservation, a difference which is
really no difference at all.'[^55] This erroneous distinction is easy to make:
if non-human organic beings like flowers and bunnies have no reason, it would
seem that we can only describe their development in a teleological (i.e.,
purposeful) manner in a *subjective* sense -- that is, in the sense that we
*project* a teleology, a <span lang="el">τέλος</span>, onto their development.
But behind this line of thinking is the false idea that *purpose* belongs only
to intelligent, thinking organisms like humans. As Hegel puts it, observing
consciousness 'does not recognize that the concept of purpose is not existing
somewhere else in some intellect but just is here [in the organism] and as a
thing.'[^56] Really, it is inevitable for *observing* consciousness to make this
mistake, since 'purpose' is internal to organic things, and therefore not
observable. To return to the claim of my last paragraph, this is again why the
observer has no adequate understanding of itself: it cannot *observe* reason and
purpose, and thus has nothing on which to base a conception of itself.

Hegel recognises that the observer's current conception of organic nature,
wherein the organism has no inherent, self-concerned purpose, quickly falls
apart. If this were true, then an organism's 'doing would accordingly be empty
efficaciousness without any content in its own self; it would not even be the
efficaciousness of a machine, for a machine has a purpose, and its
efficaciousness thereby has a determinate content.'[^57] In other words, if
organic activity had no intrinsic purpose, it would be meaningless and random.
As Michael Inwood puts it nicely, 'for all we know, bears might light fires or
knit themselves sweaters to fend off the cold.'[^58] Of course, we witness
every day that this isn't the case: there is regularity to the development and
activity of organisms, demonstrating that there is some teleology within the
organism itself, driving its self-conservation. 'In its own self,' Hegel writes,
'the activity [of an organism] is an activity inwardly turning back into itself,
not an activity led back into itself by anything alien to itself', like the
mind of the observer.[^59]

The observer's problem, from our perspective, is that it cannot comprehend the
intrinsic relation between an organism's activity and its purpose -- that is,
the directed *movement* of organic activity towards a purpose. In short, this is
because that relation, that movement, 'can only be grasped as concept', and the
observer is still stuck in a mode of thinking that expects everything to be
sensuous and observable. Consequently, Hegel explains, consciousness
'transforms' the two poles of the *individual* organism and the *universal*
purpose 'into the kind of opposition that conforms to its point of view.'[^60]
This newly posited opposition is the classical dualism of **body and soul**. The
observer now understands the organism as divided in terms of its form: body and
soul are not separate *entities*, but separate senses, aspects, or modes of the
single organism which is 'laid as the foundation'.[^61] What the body is is
self-explanatory. The soul is the 'inner' aspect of the organism, but can
nonetheless be observed, since 'it appears as doing, or the *movement* of
*vanishing* [i.e., changing] actuality'.[^62] To understand this, think of the
Latin translation of Aristotle's work on the soul: *De Anima*. The soul,
'anima', is what moves -- *animates* -- the organism.

The soul expresses itself in all organisms as 'reproduction' and, in animal
organisms, also as 'sensibility' and 'irritability'. Hegel explains what each of
these mean:[^63]

1. Sensibility is the animal's 'organic reflective turn into itself, or the
   universal fluidity of this concept.' This is a rather strange definition
   today, but it can be understood by comparison to the word *sensation*, when
   referring to the phenomenon whereby an animal's nervous system 'takes in' the
   surrounding world, thus enacting the animal's 'turn into itself'. The nervous
   system can thus be understood as the 'outer' manifestation of 'inner'
   sensibility.
   As a sensing thing, the animal organism is something *in-itself*.
2. Irritability is the animal's 'organic elasticity': the organism's capacity
   for 'conducting itself *reactively*'. In other words, if sensibility is the
   *receptive* property of the soul, irritability is the *responsive*
   property. Irritability is the 'actualization' of the organism's
   *being-for-others*, Hegel explains. The 'muscular system' is Hegel's example
   of an outer manifestation of irritability.
3. Reproduction involves both the growth and self-maintenance of the organism,
   as well as the genesis of new organisms. It is essentially the same as what
   Aristotle called the 'vegetative soul'. Because reproduction is the condition
   of possibility for an organism in general, Hegel describes it as organic
   'activity as a purpose in itself'. Through reproduction, an organism is *in
   and for itself*. The 'intestinal system' is one outer manifestation of
   reproduction, Hegel suggests.

The whole point of describing organisms in this way, as possessing a soul with
manifold properties, is so that the observer can devise a new kind of law: at
this stage, laws 'concern a relationship between organic moments in their
twofold meaning', Hegel writes.[^64] The 'twofold' in question is the organism's
*inner* and *outer*: the inner side of the organism is the soul, the
'life-principle', and its properties such as sensibility, and the outer side is
the *expression* of these properties, in concretenesses such as the nervous
system.

The observer looks to construct laws regarding these life-properties, the
'*factors*' of the organism; however, Hegel explains, the search for these laws
exposes the fact that although they might *appear* as distinct divisions of the
organism, they are in fact the opposite: sensibility, for instance, is actually
'a universal *moment* which is essentially undivided and inseparable from
reaction, or irritability, and reproduction.'[^65] The reason for this is that,
when a rational observer (like a nineteenth-century scientist) comes up with a
law such as, 'sensibility and irritability stand in inverse relations of
magnitude, so that as the one increases, the other diminishes', she is ignoring
the fact that these factors -- sensibility and irritability -- are not separable,
wholly distinct quantities, but *modalities* of the same whole (that is, the
organism).[^66] If this is unclear, Hegel makes it clearer by use of an analogy:

> Just as [a] hole and what fills it and what is removed from it are
> *qualitatively opposed*, what is real in them and its determinate magnitude
> are one and the same. ... So too the organic moments [sensibility,
> irritability, etc.] are likewise inseparable both according to what is real in
> them and in their magnitude, which is itself the magnitude of what is real in
> them. The one decreases and increases only with the other, *for either one of
> them has a meaning at all only insofar as the other is present.*[^67]

As such, to construct laws regarding the 'quantities' of the organism's
life-properties is to get no further than tautology. There is really *one*
quantity -- the organism itself. As Hegel writes, 'an organic *existence* is
such a quantitative size ... It is what is increased or diminished, and if it is
increased, *both* [or, *all*] of its factors are also increased.'[^68]
Interestingly, this point was already suggested in the first Kantian *Critique*
when Kant likens a system of science to 'an animal body, whose growth does not
add a limb but rather makes each limb stronger and fitter for its end without
any alteration of proportion.'[^69] Ultimately, The mistake of the observer was
to isolate *moments* of the organism's *life process* and interpret them as
distinct, quantifiable properties of an *inner* that affects an opposing
*outer*. 'The law wants to grasp and express [this] opposition as motionless
aspects', Hegel writes, 'but in being kept apart in that way, they lose their
organic significance.'[^70] Hegel gives a rather opaque definition of the
organism as *the movement of the dissolution of determinations*; this definition
makes sense when we see that the observer's attempt to isolate the moments of
the organism's life process and render them as stable determinations
*necessarily fails* because of the constant movement and interrelation of these
moments within the organic whole. As Kalkavage puts it,

> More generally, Hegel argues that static systems of *any* kind cannot capture
> the Concept of life. Formalism in biology turns life into anatomy: the study
> of the living organism insofar as it is *dead*. ... In using number to
> formulate laws of organisms, reason also reveals it *bond* with the abstract
> understanding. It reduces the fluidity of life to the static being of the
> inorganic. It makes the determinateness of living things rational at the
> expense of what they *are*.[^71]

Now, the observer is different to the Understanding that appeared in the
consciousness chapter, because the **relation** that its laws are supposed to
describe is *objective* -- that is, the relation is found within the observed
object (the organism) rather than imposed upon the world by consciousness. At
the end of the chapter on consciousness, Understanding was transformed into
self-consciousness because consciousness recognised *itself* as the movement and
relation of law-bound objects. For the *observer*, however, it is not the
*relation* but the **relata**, the 'objects' themselves, that cannot be found in
the observed thing. These relata -- which the observer names the 'inner' and
'outer' -- are in constant motion and change, and thus cannot be grasped as
easily as they could at the stage of Understanding. The observer, Inwood writes,
'can no longer get a grip on intrinsically static sides needed for a law. The
sides immediately succumb to the unrest of the concept.'[^72] Or, as Hegel puts
it, 'because the moments are essentially *pure transition*, it turns out that
there are no such *existing* aspects as had been demanded for there to be
law.'[^73]

The result of all this is that the observer has yet again failed to describe
nature in law -- and, more broadly, that reason (embodied in the observer) has
failed to find itself reflected in nature. The systems of law hitherto attempted
have remained too static to capture the endless motion and transition, the
inherent *dynamism*, of the natural world. What can be said with lawful
necessity of a being that is constantly shifting? The organic being, Hegel
explains, 'refuses to offer any *enduring* sensuous differences [i.e.
differentiating qualities] to observation'; or, in other words, 'its essential
determinateness [is] only the *changing flux of existing*
determinatenesses.'[^74]

#### Observation of Nature: The Outside World {#outside}

After all of these failed attempts at constructing laws of the organism
*itself*, Hegel turns to 'the *outer* of the organic' -- that is, the organism's
environment -- and *its* inner and outer. Of course, the observer already looked
at the environment previously, but found no necessity or lawfulness in its
effect on the organism's form. As Hegel acknowledges, 'inorganic nature [that
is, the environment] cannot constitute the aspect of a law vis-à-vis the organic
creature, because the latter at the same time is utterly for itself and assumes
a universal and free relation to inorganic nature.'[^75]

In order to preserve this freedom, reason leads the observer to a conception of
the organism as a **mediation**: a 'mediating middle' between being-in-itself
(inorganic nature -- the environment's *outer*) and being-for-itself (pure life
-- the environment's *inner*).[^76] The last time we considered the environment,
the observer looked at the organism as a passive recipient of the environment's
influence. Now, the organism is conceptualised as a more complex being, residing
in a syllogistic relationship *between* life and the environment. 'Life', in
this sense, is what Hegel calls an 'infinite One', which might remind us of his
description of life and infinity in the earlier chapter on the understanding:

> This simple infinity, or the absolute concept, is to be called the simple
> essence of life, the soul of the world, the universal bloodstream, which is
> omnipresent, neither dulled nor interrupted by any difference.[^77]

The life as 'infinite One' which is mediated in the organism also fits this
description: it is not 'interrupted by any difference' because it is a 'simple
negativity', nothing but the indifferent *striving to be*. As Hegel writes, 'It
is a matter of indifference to this stream of life what sorts of mills it
drives.' When it is mediated in the organism, therefore, 'life appears in it as
the simplicity of subsistence [*Einfachheit des Bestehens*].'[^78] On its own,
therefore, life is 'devoid of content': a striving force is nothing without
*that which strives*; it is only in its mediation with nature -- that is, in the
organism -- where life is given an organic shape, and expresses itself. This
makes sense; after all, there is nothing we can point to and say, '*this* is
life itself.'

This conception of 'the organic whole' -- that is, the environment and the
organisms within it -- still shares a similarity with previous conceptions,
insofar as the dualism of *inner* and *outer* works in a relationship wherein
the latter is an expression or manifestation of the former. In this case, the
stream of life is expressed, in its mediation with inorganic nature, as the
organism. Now, since the stream of life is indifferent to *how* it is
manifested, as explained above, only by means of **numbers** can 'the whole
range of differences which develop themselves' in organisms be generalised.
Hegel saw this in the life sciences of his own time in the concept of 'specific
gravity', which 'can be observed just as well as can the determinateness of
number'. Harris helpfully explains this concept which, today, might be a little
less obvious:

> Specific gravity is the 'inward aspect' of the different 'shapes' of matter.
> Hegel conceived of "specific gravity" in strict accordance with its name. It
> was a *specification* (at a higher level of logical development) of the
> primitively undifferentiated force of gravity. In Hegel's interpretation, this
> makes it analogous to our concept of atoms and molecules. What the *number*
> corresponds to in the object ... is a numerically determinate quantum of
> energy.[^79]

Basically, the observer takes the specific gravity of an organism to be the
determinate, numerical signature of that organism: the measure of the organism's
being-for-itself. Number takes the organic flux of the stream of life and
renders it stable and determinate.

But is this not just another attempt to repress the freedom and *in*determinacy
present in every organism? As we saw above, no singular quantity -- whether it
is of a property like sensibility, or of specific gravity as in this case -- can
capture an object as a *whole* of *related*, qualitatively different properties.
If we were to hierarchically order a group of things according to their specific
gravity, nothing about a particular thing's position in a hierarchy would tell
us why it is *qualitatively* such-and-such a way. Again, Harris summarises
Hegel's critique of this kind of hierarchical science:

> Any measurable property that varies progressively can *represent* the essence
> in series of this kind; in other words it can be a *Vorstellung* of the
> essence, but it is not the "Thing itself." The Thing itself would be the
> Concept (and we might say that it is *represented* in a genuine theory). But
> no parallelism of properties in any sequence of bodies could be a Concept of
> the essential nature in its self-differentiation. Serial arrangements,
> therefore, are not what we ought to be trying to establish; organizing things
> in "series" is not yet "science."[^80]
