## Prologue:<br>The *Differenzschrift* {#begin}

### Substance and Subject

Hegel's first widely recognised publication was named directly after its subject
matter: *The Difference Between Fichte's and Schelling's System of
Philosophy*.[^1] It is also known by the shorter name, *Differenzschrift*. By
engaging with these two major figures in German thought (Schelling was two years
younger than Hegel, but quicker to make a name for himself intellectually),
Hegel began to carve out his own name in the history of philosophy. A few things
can be said to elucidate the philosophical context out of which the
*Differenzschrift* was born.

As mentioned in the introduction above, Spinoza was a hugely significant figure
for German idealist philosophy. He had succeeded in constructing a philosophical
system that was entirely monistic, spiralling out from one fundamental
substance; however, he had done so at the cost of 'fatalism': in Spinoza's
universe, everything is determined. There is no room for true freedom. Now, for
Johann Gottlieb Fichte, this made Spinoza the arche-dogmatist. For Fichte, all
systems of philosophy proceed by abstracting from either one of the two
principle entities of experience: 'the thing' or 'the subject'; *dogmatism* is
Fichte's name for those systems, like Spinoza's, who put the 'thing' (or
'substance') first, and attempt to explain subjectivity's emergence out of the
substance of nature.[^2] Spinoza's dogmatism is the most honest and
sophisticated, because Spinoza readily admits that *free* subjectivity *cannot*
emerge from the substance of nature. But so much for philosophical honesty: what
good is a fatalist system when *moral freedom* is such a pressing issue of
philosophy? This line of criticism is what drove Fichte to praise Kant's
critical idealism, which -- in Fichtean terms -- started with the subject (thus
guaranteeing freedom) and then went on to establish what can be known about
things.

Had Fichte taken the project of critique to its final end? Not necessarily: for
his students (among which was a young Friedrich von Schelling) Fichte was, like
Kant, too comfortable with the antinomies in his thought. Kant had assumed that
when reason embarks on a pathway that inevitably ends in contradiction, that
pathway must be dismissed as illusory; he dismissed 'dialectic in general' as 'a
logic of illusion'.[^3] These dialectical 'antinomies' of reason led Kant to
*postulate* freedom for the sake of the moral law, since -- in his
transcendental dialectic -- he found that *both* subjective freedom and natural
necessity could be proved as the truth. Does Fichte's incommensurable division
between dogmatic rationalism and critical idealism, in the face of which the
latter must simply be *chosen*, not resemble such an antinomy? Violetta L.
Waibel argues for something like this:

> Whereas Kant judges the antinomy between causal necessity and theoretical and
> practical freedom in the *Critique of Pure Reason* as a mere illusion that
> arises because of the disregard for the scope and the boundaries of the
> theoretical domain ... we can maintain that Fichte's dialectical methodology
> is operating with a logical structure that is comparable to Kant's antinomies.
> In both theories we find an analysis of conflicting propositions, each of
> which can be shown as being a valid proposition.[^4]

To be sure, Fichte doesn't construe the divide between dogmatism and idealism as
an antinomy, and it doesn't play the same role in his system as the antinomies
do for Kant. Nonetheless, for Fichte's students it was not enough to simply
*choose* idealism over dogmatism, no matter how productive such a choice might
be. To these students, the assumption of transcendental freedom (in Kant) or the
moral decision of idealism over dogmatism (in Fichte) was 'the final form of
precritical dogmatism' in German idealism; as such, 'The antinomy between
Spinoza's doctrine of necessity and Fichte's doctrine of freedom must somehow be
resolved in some higher synthesis'.[^5] This is the problem that Schelling faced
in his 'philosophy of identity', and the problem that was on Hegel's mind at the
time of the *Differenzschrift*.

### The Thing Itself {#thing}

#### The Spirit of Kantian Philosophy

Despite the increasing complexity of his work, Fichte always envisioned himself
to be clarifying what Kant had already established. Hegel seems to accept this
idea: in the preface to the *Differenzschrift*, he writes that 'The Kantian
philosophy needed to have its spirit distinguished from its letter, and to have
its purely speculative principle lifted out of the remainder ... it is this
principle that Fichte extracted in a purer, stricter form and called the spirit
of Kantian philosophy'.[^6]
