## Consciousness {#begin}

<blockquote class="epigraph">If the doors of perception were cleansed everything would appear to man as it is, infinite.<footer>William Blake, *The Marriage of Heaven and Hell*</footer></blockquote>
<blockquote class="epigraph">Wir suchen überall das Unbedingte, und finden immer nur Dinge. <footer>Novalis, <i>Blüthenstaub</i>, 1798</footer></blockquote>

### Sensuous Certainty {#s-c}

'Sensuous certainty' is the name for the initial kind of knowing an object;
specifically, the kind of knowing for which the object is *immediate*. Taking
any spatiotemporal thing as its object, sensuous-certainty has no limit as
regards its 'wealth', since it can take its object from anywhere in the infinite
boundaries of space and time, and can furthermore divide any such object into
more distinct objects. The object apprehended by sensuous-certainty is not only
immediate but *complete*, since nothing is taken away or added to it; instead,
it is laid before consciousness as *this* which *is*. In other words, it is
apprehended in its pure being. The apprehending consciousness, as well, is also
held in certainty, by itself, as another *this* which *is*; consequently, any
particular experience of sensuous-certainty takes the form: '*this* I, a
singular individual consciousness, knows *this* object, a singular individual
thing'. In the world of sensuous-certainty, there is no causality, no
unification, no essences or properties, no relations: there is merely the being
of manifold particulars. This is sensuous-certainty's claim to absolute
knowledge.

Clearly, then, while the strength of sensuous-certainty is in the *completeness*
of its object, its weakness is in the *abstractness* of its truth, since it
expresses nothing but the pure being of the object and of the consciousness
apprehending it. In fact, it is this abstractness and simplicity which reveals
to us the dialectic within sensuous-certainty. As a singular thing, the object
of sensuous-certainty is a *this* which is *here* and *now*. Each of these three
terms name the radical particularity of the thing. I have sensuous-certainty
*now* ... and yet, as soon as I have named this 'now', it is gone: the moment
has passed.  Likewise, if I face the thing, I can say that it is *here*, but if
I turn around, then while I can still refer to a 'here', it is no longer 'here'
that the thing in question is found. In both of these cases, the *Here* and
*Now* persevere, while the thing of which I had sensuous-certainty disappears.
That which we call 'now' is indifferent to whether it is 5:00 <span
class="sc">PM</span>, 3:00 <span class="sc">AM</span>, or any other time.
Through every moment, the *Now* endures; it is *mediated* through the moment.
The moment is a particular expression of the *Now*, and the location of
sensuous-certainty is an expression of the *Here*. *Now* and *Here* are thus
*universals*. 'Now' means: *not* 5:00 <span class="sc">PM</span>, *not* 3:00
<span class="sc">AM</span>, *not* any unique particular moment; as Hegel
explains, 'As little as night and day are its being, it is just as much night
and day. ... Such a simple is through negation; it is neither this nor that, it
is both a *not-this* and is just as indifferent to being this or that, and such
a simple is what we call a *universal*.'[^1]

As such, the truth of sensuous-certainty is the opposite of its original truth.
At the start, its truth was in its consistent particularity; it is now in its
emergent universality. Sensuous-certainty has *refuted itself*, and language has
shown this: 'In language, we immediately refute what we *mean to say*, and since
the universal is the truth of sensuous-certainty, and language only expresses
this truth, it is, in that way, not possible at all that we could say what we
*mean* about sensuous being.'[^2] By this, Hegel shows that, just as language
necessarily deals only with universals (in 'this tree', both the word 'this' and
'tree' are mediated universals, as explained above), so too does
sensuous-certainty itself give rise to universals when it 'means' to refer only
to particulars. In the very moment, I might 'know what I mean' when I refer to
*this tree*; nonetheless, as soon as the words ('this tree') are *written down*,
my subjectivity is removed from them, and universality takes its place.
Consequently we find that what is persistent in sensuous-certainty's experience
of the *This* is not the *object*, but the subject *for whom the object is a
'This', here and now*. 'Now' is midnight, or noon, or whenever else, because *I*
name it so; 'now' is always *my* 'now'. (Incidentally, this notion of language
undermining the conscious wish of subjectivity will be famously repeated by
Sigmund Freud).

Who is this 'I'? As the subject that names an object to be a particular This, at
a particular *here and now*, it must too be a particular. There is an 'I' for
each moment; an 'I' for each This that is apprehended. However, this radical
particularity can only be realised by comparison -- contradistinction -- with
other radical particulars. From whose standpoint is this comparison carried out?
It is precisely through the *universal* 'I' that it is done. In all experience
of sensuous-certainty, 'what does not appears is *I as universal*, whose
[universal] seeing is neither a seeing of the tree nor of this house.'[^3] As
such, the truth of sensuous-certainty has shifted away from the object and on to
the subject.

At this point, sensuous-certainty has gone through two dialectical moments that
transformed its original position. At first, it made its claim to absolute
knowledge by (ostensibly) grasping its object *immediately*, as a particular
'this', in a particular time and space. Sensuous-certainty started with the
*object* because any shape of consciousness (as opposed to self-consciousness)
starts off as directed towards something that is not itself. This immediate
particularity was negated, however, as the very concepts -- 'This', 'Here', and
'Now' -- that were supposed to be the guarantors of radical particularity turned
out to be universals, defined through negation (the *true* 'now' is always
*not*-now; it can *never* be named). Thus, following the first dialectical
moment, the *object* (the universal This) became the essential character of
sensuous-certainty. Following this, however, it is the universal *subject* that
becomes essential, since there must be an agent of comparison to realise the
negativity that constitutes the universal object. That is to say, there must be
a subject who -- *through comparison* -- realises the true Now as a universal
'not-now'.

The third and final moment of sensuous-certainty tries for absolute knowledge
once again by avoiding  comparison and the universals that arise as a
consequence of comparison. Instead, this third moment focuses purely on the
*relation* between consciousness and thing. Comparison is avoided by *denying
time as a process*. I no longer 'say' now and here (thus universalising them); I
merely *point* to the always-particular This-Here-Now. The unit of experience,
therefore, is the immediate unity of the subject-object relation. There is no
concern or reference to what comes before or after this relation in its
particular moment. The trouble with the 'pointing' moment of sensuous-certainty
is that, in fact, it *never* actually grasps its object (i.e., the
subject-object relation). As soon as I have pointed to that which is *now*, it
is *no longer now* anymore. The immediate *presence* that sensuous-certainty
hopes for has not been apprehended. Sensuous-certainty thus enters a dialectical
movement once again.

Hegel finds that sensuous-certainty's pointing has three logical (i.e., not
temporal) moments within itself. First, the Now that is pointed to is taken to
be the truth, pure and simple. Second, as the Now immediately passes away into
the past, the pointed-out-Now is negated: it is *not* (i.e., it is in the past).
Lastly, this negation is *itself* negated, and we return to the first Now,
albeit in a *mediated* manner. Realising that time is an ever-appearing
*disappearing*; a dialectical *unity* of appearing and disappearing wherein now
is always going away, consciousness returns to the newly-contextualised Now,
which is henceforth seen as one moment -- one particuklar -- amongst many. This
*sublated* Now of the third moment is thus a 'Now of Nows': an hour of minutes,
a minute of seconds, etc. As Hegel writes, '*Pointing out* is thus itself the
movement that declares what the Now in truth is, namely, a result, or a
plurality of Nows taken together; and pointing out is the experience that the
Now is a *universal*.'[^4]
