#### Reflections on Sensuous Certainty {#re-s-c}

Sensuous certainty is the beginning for Hegel precisely because it is the
beginning for *us*; as the Introduction states, it is a mistake to make a fuss
about *how to begin* before actually beginning. In actual fact, 'this fear of
erring is already the error itself'.[^5] By asking if it is even *possible* for
cognition to apprehend the absolute, this fear of error presupposes that
cognition stands outside of, or apart from, the absolute (that is, the truth),
and yet can still somehow be truthful itself. This is clearly a mistake; as
such, Hegel puts issues of method to one side, and simply *begins* his analysis
of experience. As Frederick Beiser writes: 'The standards, rules, and guidelines
appropriate to a subject matter should be the result, not the starting point, of
the investigation. So, if Hegel has any methodology at all, it appears to be an
*anti*-methodology, a method to suspend all methods.'[^6] So, the
*Phenomenology* begins with the most familiar, unconceptualised form of
experience: immediate certainty of sensuous objects. The language that expresses
this experience -- at least according to 'common sense' -- expresses the simple,
particular being of these objects. 'We are in the world that Adam bequeathed to
us,' Harris writes, 'the world of *things with names* ... this is how our
language gets its significance -- by referring to objects whose "being" we can
confirm by a simple use of the senses.'[^7]

It is language that best illuminates the dialectic of sensuous certainty.
Language, in naming the 'immediate' object of experience, realises before we do
that the immediate -- 'what *truly* is' -- is precisely what is *not*. As soon as
I put a name to *this moment*, it has passed away and *is* no longer. The actual
truth lies in the universality of the concepts that language employs, and *not*
in the things of experience. As such, the modern skeptics like Hume, who endorse
skepticism by accepting immediate certainty of sensuous objects as the *only*
knowable truth, are insufficiently skeptical: they fail to notice that there is
nothing universal in immediate objects whatsoever. 'The experience of the
sensible world teaches us that truth is properly to be found in the *concepts*
to which names refer, and that the reference of names to things is only possible
in the context of a time and space that are already concepts.'[^8] The immediate
object that I am trying (and failing) to name when I say 'this' is completely
private, because it is particular to my own experience. When I name it, the
universal concepts of language snatch all particularity and immediacy out of the
question, and all that remains is universal and conceptual. The modern Humean
skeptics would therefore be wise to familiarise themselves with the ancient
participants of the Eleusinian mysteries who, in their *consumption* of sensuous
things, were assured of their ultimate impermanence. Likewise, even animals --
for whom all sensuous things are the objects of an instinctual desire to survive
-- realise the impermanence of these things. 'Despairing of the reality of those
things and in the total certainty of the nullity of those things, they without
further ado simply help themselves to them and devour them. Just like the
animals, all of nature celebrates those revealed mysteries which teach the truth
about sensuous things.'[^9]

> By my *pointing out* this piece of paper, I thus learn from experience what
> the truth of sensuous-certainty in fact is. I point it out as a *Here*, which
> if a Here of other Heres, or which in its own self is a *simple ensemble* of
> many *Heres*, which is to say, is a universal. In that way, I receive it as it
> is in truth, and instead of knowing what is immediate, *I perceive*.[^10]

This is how Hegel concludes the chapter on sensuous certainty. The 'truth of
sensuous-certainty' contains its *un*truth; the immediacy of
sensuous-certainty's objects inevitably dissolves as soon as it is acknowledged
and, consequently, a new -- *mediated* -- claim to absolute knowledge comes on the
scene: **perception**.
