### Perception {#per}

<blockquote class="short epigraph">Things fall apart.<footer>W.B. Yeats, *The Second Coming*, 1919</footer></blockquote>

Where sensuous certainty claimed to find absolute truth in the particular and
the immediate, perception -- arising *necessarily* from the dialectic of sensuous
certainty -- makes its claim to absolute truth in mediated, simple universals:
precisely, *things*. A thing is a thing with many properties, perceived by a
universal subject. The Thing of perception is the result of the sublated This
that had its origin in sensuous certainty; as a determine negation, a
*not-This*, the Thing is determined by its *mediacy*, its *universality*, and
its *differentiation*. In the Thing, a manifold of properties is unified;
'*many* such properties are posited at the same time, and each one is the
negative of the other'. The universal (that is, the unified Thing)
'expresses' the manifold properties, but the properties themselves are also
determined by '*relating themselves to themselves*', and by '*permeat[ing]* each
other in that universality as a *simple* unity without *making contact with*
each other'. We can consequently say that the Thing is mediated through its
properties, and its properties through itself; indeed, Hegel defines '*thinghood*
itself' as 'a *simple togetherness of the many*'.[^11]

The properties of a thing are indifferent to one another. A pebble is smooth,
and also heavy, but its smoothness makes no difference to its heaviness, and
vice versa. How, then, are they part of the same thing? For one, they all 'are
in *one* simple *Here* in which they also permeate each other. None has a
different Here from the others. Rather, each is everywhere in the same Here as
are the others.'[^12] Hegel accordingly finds that it is the 'indifferent
*Also*' that relates these properties to one another, and allows them to come
together as a unified manifold, constituting the thing. (Thus the conclusion of
the above paragraph, that thinghood is the 'togetherness of the many': thinghood
is the *Also* itself).

Thinghood-as-togetherness is the *positive* determination of the thing; however,
in order to be itself, a thing must also have a *negative* determination: that
is to say, a pebble is only a pebble insofar as it is *not* a bicycle, *not* an
owl, and so on. The properties of a thing must not only relate to themselves,
therefore, but must also *oppose* one another, to differentiate themselves. As
such, the difference of manifold properties within a unified thing 'does not
amount to an indifferent difference but rather to an excluding difference'.[^13]
The relation of a property to other properties thus *reaches out* of the thing
that the property belongs to. Hegel thus describes the Thing as a 'simple medium
[which] is not only an *Also*, an indifferent unity; [but] also a *One*, an
*excluding unity*'.[^14] *Negation is a constituent of thinghood*.

At this point, Hegel explicates the three moments of the Thing as it is grasped
by perception so far. Firstly, it is an 'indifferent passive universality'; a
*medium* in which multiple properties reside, indifferent to one another, and
related merely by an *Also*. Secondly, it is a *negative universality*; a 'One'
which is individuated through *negation* and exclusion of the other. And lastly,
it is also the *sum total of its properties*, as those properties reveal
themselves to be universal in their own right, not only differentiating
themselves *passively* from one another (as Also), but also differentiating
themselves *negatively* from the properties of the Other (i.e., the not-One).
This last moment of the Thing is 'the relation of the first two moments' since
the elements of the Also (that is, the *properties*) are themselves behaving
like the One, insofar as they negatively differentiate themselves (from the
properties of the Other).

> According to the aspect in which these differences belong to the indifferent
> medium [i.e., the Thing as a passive universality, as 'Also'], the differences
> are themselves universal; each relates itself only to itself, and they do not
> affect each other. However, according to the aspect, in terms of which they
> belong to the negative unity [i.e., the Thing as One, differentiated from the
> Other], they at the same time exclude each other, but necessarily have this
> opposed relation to the properties, which are at a distance from *their Also*
> [i.e., the properties of the Other]. [^15]

Just like any shape of consciousness, perception is a claim to absolute truth.
The standard of perceptual truth is: *have I apprehended the object?* If the
perceiver's apprehension is *equal* to the object itself, and *corresponds* with
it, then the perception is true. Naturally, error is possible insofar as it is
possible to misapprehend an object. But importantly, any such error must be
because of some untruth on behalf of the *perceiver*, not the perceived object;
in comparing the perceiver's apprehension with the object, any inequality that
shows up must be an 'untruth of perceiving itself', and not an untruth of the
object, since 'the object is what is equal to itself'.[^16] The German word for
perception is *Wahrnehmung*; the task for the perceiver is as simple as having
to take [*nehmung*] the true [*wahr*].

At this point, Hegel looks again at the moments spelled out above, capturing
them as perception's dialectical transformation, brought about by its own
internal inconsistencies. This transformation is revealed when, on each occasion
wherein I try to conceptualise the object of perception, something about the
object escapes my conceptualisation. Hegel outlines the dialectic of perception
as follows: firstly, I perceive the object as a 'thing'; as *purely One*. For
instance, I perceive 'this thing, the book'. However, I also perceive 'within'
the book several properties: it is heavy, it is green, it is dry, etc. Each of
these properties is universal: many objects can possess heaviness, greenness,
and so on. As such, grasping the object as purely singular and individual was
thus a mistake; and as established in the paragraph above, the mistake must be
within *me* and not the object. I thus revise my comprehension of the object,
understanding it in the light of the idea of '*community*'. The object is both
*(a)* a community of properties, and *(b)* a member of a community of objects
with similar properties. So, to continue my example, the book is now understood
as *(a)* the sum total of its properties: its heaviness, greenness, and so on,
and also *(b)* one book *amongst many*; a member of the community of objects
that have pages, contain text, and so on -- that is, a community defined by
certain properties. But what determines these properties? What makes the book
'heavy'? It is heavy precisely because it is *not light*; its heaviness is the
*exclusion* of non-heaviness. As such I perceive the object's properties as
*determinate* through opposition to (and exclusion of) an Other; consequently, I
was mistaken again to conceptualise the object as a community -- after all,
community is defined primarily by *in*clusion. If the 'community'
conceptualisation of the object was a *negation* of the 'One' conceptualisation,
then I must negate this negation, and posit the object as an *excluding* One. As
Hegel puts it:

> 'I thus in fact did not apprehend the objective essence correctly when I
> determined it as *community* with others, or as continuity, and, according to
> the *determinateness* of the property, I must in fact break up the continuity
> into pieces and posit the objective presence as an excluding One'.[^17]

Yet again, however, I am mistaken. For it is not accurate to understand the
thing purely in terms of exclusion; after all, the properties within the thing
simply sit indifferently alongside one another. The book's greenness does not
affect its heaviness. As such, the thing is best understood as a '*communal
medium*' in which these properties abide. Now, we never really 'perceive' a
medium; rather, it is the sensuous properties that come together in that medium
that are perceived. Aside from its size, its colour, its position, and so on,
what is there left of the book for me to perceive? Consequently, Hegel comes to
realise that the truth that perception apprehends 'is thereby also not a
universal medium but rather a *singular property* for itself'.[^18] Here is
where a particularly strange moment occurs: if what I am actually perceiving is
merely a 'singular property for itself', then it is neither a property (because
it, being singular, no longer belongs to a One), nor a determinate thing
(because, being singular, it has no individuating relations to other things).
Thus, the object is a sensuous being of the sort we encountered in sensuous
certainty. We have flown away from the 'thing', and now only perceive that which
we once called a 'property' which, now, is nothing but a sensuous *this, here,
now*. The last sentence of ยง117 captures this confusing phenomenon: 'I am thus
thrown back to the beginning and pulled back into the same cycle which sublates
itself both in each moment and as a whole'.

At this point, it might seem as though consciousness has reached an aporia:
sensuous certainty collapses under its own logic, and gives way to perception,
which itself collapses and reverts back to sensuous certainty. However, Hegel
notices that something is different in this newer collapse. Though the result of
perception, just like the result of sensuous certainty, is its *dissolution*,
this dissolution nonetheless teaches us something: namely that, in its
dissolution, perception becomes *self-reflective*. With the collapse of
perception, 'consciousness takes cognizance that the *untruth*, which comes to
the fore here, falls within consciousness'.[^19]

The precise advantage of perception's 'reflective turn into itself' is that
consciousness is now aware that perception is not a mere 'simple apprehension';
that is to say, the perceiver, after self-reflection, is *consciously aware* of
their own perceiving. As Harris writes,

> Consciousness is no longer naรฏve but reflective. At this point in the
> dialectic of sense-certainty it became the standard of what truly is; but in
> the dialectic of perception it distinguishes its reflective activity as the
> source of 'falsity.' [^20]

As is written above, an important (perhaps the most important) moment for
perception is the realisation that error can lie only in the perceiver, and not
the object. This is the reason that perception is reflective; it realises itself
to be, in Harris's words, 'the source of falsity'. This reflective realisation
is the way that perception escapes the aporia described above.

The crux of the aporia is that, while perception apprehends its object as a One,
it is also aware of multiple properties in the object, undermining the One-ness
of the object. The object cannot be both *one* and *many*; as such, there must
be *some kind of falsity*. But as we have learned, the falsity that we seem to
detect in objects must always originate *in us*; so, Hegel explains that 'we
ourselves are [now] conscious of this diversity through which [the object]
ceases to be One as *falling within us*'.[^21] What this means is that the
*diversity* (i.e., the not-One-ness) of the object is an imposition of our own
consciousness, rather than an attribute of the thing perceived. The properties
of the thing 'come undone from each other', as Hegel puts it, merely because we
perceive the thing in multiple diverse moments. Consequently, the thing *is* One
after all; and the diversity we perceive in it -- the *multiplicity* of
properties -- is attributed to the diversity of our perceiving.

But on the other hand, the thing must *surely* have a diverse multiplicity of
properties, since it is this multiplicity that, through excluding the properties
of other objects, individualises the thing and makes it determinate. (Indeed,
throughout this chapter, the word 'determinate' is near-synonymous with
'individualised through the exclusion of other properties'). So, if the diverse
properties *do* exist in the thing, after all, it must be the One-ness of the
thing that originates in our perception. Thus when we say that a book is green
and *also* heavy, thick and *also* rectangular, this 'also' is the work of
consciousness, not of the thing. 'The *positing-into-a-one* of these properties
belongs only to consciousness'.[^22] Thus we perceive a thing as unified;
nonetheless, perception also remains aware that the properties of the thing in
itself' are separate, and it does this by means of the notion 'insofar as':
a plant, *insofar as* it is green, is not tall, and *insofar as* it is tall, it
is not spiky, and so on.

At this point, consciousness has become aware that it has a twofold way of
viewing things, as (1) subjectively -- that is, as a subjectively posited One --
and (2) objectively -- that is, taken in itself as a multiplicity of properties.
But *that the thing can be viewed in such a twofold manner* implies that **the
thing itself is twofold**: it exists 'in a determinate way *for the*
comprehending *consciousness*', but also in 'the way in which it offers itself
and is reflected itself *back into itself*' -- in other words, the thing has its
truth as for-consciousness, and 'in its own self has an opposed truth'.[^23]
Here is where the distinction between *being-for-self* and *being-for-another*
first emerge. The question of whether the unity of thinghood should be
attributed to the *perceiver* or the *thing itself* thus comes to an end in this
paragraph, which Harris summarises as follows:

> Thus both the thing and consciousness have now taken the roles of the One and
> the Many. It is not just perceiving, but the thing itself, that shows itself
> in this doubled way (as being unity and plurality in and for itself).
> Whichever side it exhibits as true to the apprehending consciousness it has
> the opposite truth within itself. [^24]

#### The Illusion of Perception {#illp}

Finally we move beyond the issue of the One and the Many, and enter the domain
of being-for-itself and being-for-consciousness. Hegel explains that 'the thing
is *One*, reflected into itself; it is *for itself*, but it is also *for an
other*, namely, it is an *other* for itself *as it* is for an other'.[^25] That
is to say, the thing's being-for-itself is not solely determined by the essence
of the thing's being-for-itself, but also by the *other* that is perceiving it.
Put another way, the *twofold character* of the thing -- the contradiction
between its being-for-itself and being-for-another -- 'is distributed into two
objects'; 'The thing therefore is in and for itself, self-equal, but *this unity
with itself is disturbed through other things*'.[^26]

Understanding the twofold character of the thing gives clarity to the nature of
properties: the diversity of properties that the thing possesses doesn't
*divide* the thing, since such a diversity is merely the diversity of
*relations* that the thing has with other things. This plant is tall *in
relation to* shorter plants; this book is green *in relation to* blue or red
books, and so on. In itself, an object is therefore propertyless and
indeterminate. This reveals to us that *otherness is essential to indiduality*;
as Kalkavage has remarked, 'this is the first step toward the conclusion that
community is more real than individuality'.[^27]

At this point, perception's concept of the *thing* involves both identity and
difference: it is identical with itself, and different from others, and both of
these facts determine what the thing actually is. The self-identity of the thing
determines how it will be for others, and this being-for-others is what
determines the thing's *difference* from other things. But let's look more
closely at this relation between identity and difference: uncontroversially, a
thing is a thing insofar as it is identical with itself. This is the role of
*identity* within the concept of the thing. But for any *x* to be identical to
itself, it must be *determinate* (that is, it must be individuated in some way).
And we have learned that the thing only becomes determinate through its
being-for-another; this is the role of *difference* within the concept of the
thing ... as such, the thing is constitutively contradictory: 'it is for itself
insofar as it is for others, and *it is for others insofar as it is for
itself*'.[^28] As far as the *thing of perception* is concerned, independence
depends on others; independence is not independent. Thus perception comes to an
end, as its grasp on sensuous universals turns out to be an illusion -- merely a
contradictory play of 'empty abstractions' (*singularity*, *universality*,
*essence*, and so on). Perception is the shape of consciousness most often
understood to be 'common sense', and yet it completely fails to actually grasp
its objects. It is a form of sophistry, since it repeatedly asserts what it had
previously asserted to be untrue.

> That healthy common sense which takes itself to be solid, real consciousness,
> is, in perceiving, only the play of *these abstractions*, and that common
> sense is the poorest exactly at the point where it means to be the richest.
> While it is pushed around by these empty essences and is thus thrown out of
> the arms of one abstraction into the arms of another, and, through its own
> sophistry, alternately goes to all the trouble of tenaciously clinging to one
> of them and asserting it to be true, only then to turn around and assert its
> opposite to be true, and then to set itself against the truth, it says that
> philosophy only deals with *thought-things* [*Gedankendingen*]. [^29]
