### Force and the Understanding {#und}
#### Appearance and the Supersensible World {.subtitle}

Part A of the *Phenomenology*, entitled *Consciousness*, shows the development
of universality -- that is, the development of that which makes objects
thinkable. In sensuous certainty, universality was simply denied; consciousness
claimed to have immediate access to its object as a This. But this claim turned
out to be untrue, and sensuous certainty gave rise to the sensuous universal --
the property -- which perception embraced, in its conceptualising of the
individual Thing. This, too, turned out to be mistaken, as the individuality
that perception held to be true was mere sophistry, and what emerged was a
notion of the Thing as being-for-another: a set of relations to other things
(other sets of relations). Perception thereby ended in a deadlock between
being-for-itself and being-for-another. The *unity* of this opposition is what
gives rise to the *understanding*, and its object: the *unconditioned
universal*, or, as Hegel refers to it in the title: **force**. Now since
being-for-itself and being-for-another are hereby united, we can no longer make
claims about objects as they are *for us* without also making the same claims
about the objects as they are *in themselves*. Otherwise, we would end up back
in the aporia of perception, wherein consciousness seems to falsify the object.
So -- how does Hegel make sense of this unity, this 'force'?

Force was a central concept in eighteenth-century physics, with Leibniz and
Newton establishing the system of *dynamics* -- that is, the science of force
which attempts to find regularity in the apparently chaotic universe: why do
objects fall to the ground? Why do the planets move? What keeps me from falling
through my chair? -- These are central questions of force. Force can therefore
be understood as *cause and effect*, *expression and expressed*, and so on. It
is in this section of the *Phenomenology*, on force and the understanding, in
which objects are first conceptualised as things of force -- the *appearance* of
a thing is the appearance of *force's action*: a thing, in this sense, is
therefore a *happening* (a th-ing). Note the subtitle of the chapter,
*Appearance and the Supersensible World*: at the stage of understanding,
consciousness conceives of things as the appearances of supersensible essences;
and the form of these essences is force, or the unconditioned universal. Thus
while the chapter on perception characterised the common-sense 'manifest' image
of objects, the present chapter characterises a 'scientific' image, wherein
there is something *behind* what is manifest.[^30]

Because understanding thinks of its world of objects as a manifest image of a
non-perceptible, underlying scientific image, it therefore claims that its
objects are mere *representations*. Force is that which underlies these
representations; while perception ended up with two representations of the
object (being-for-itself and being-for-another, particular and universal), the
force of understanding is the 'metaphysical essence' of objects 'whose function
is to explain the unity of perceptual experience in terms of its being an
experience of particulars having individualized universal properties'.[^31]
Understanding is therefore a reflective stage of consciousness, since its
knowledge of things in themselves (that is, the things as they are determined by
their metaphysical essences, not by the way we represent them) is *mediated*,
relying on our ability to go beyond perceptual experience. Hegel's name for the
metaphysical basis of the understanding's representations is the **unconditioned
universal**.

To reiterate: since the thing in perception was left split into two parts,
being-for-itself and being-for-another, understanding attempts to heal this
division by positing the unconditioned universal, which can be understood as the
*being-as-such* of the thing. Expressed in this way, it sounds as though
understanding is the ultimate and comprehensive stage of consciousness; however,
the fact that hundreds of pages in the *Phenomenology* remain suggests that that
is not the case. What, then, is insufficient in the understanding? Well, to
start with, consciousness is not yet aware of itself as being conscious of its
object: 'in this movement consciousness only had the objective essence [that is,
the object] and not consciousness as such in its content, the result for
consciousness is to be posited [only] in its objective meaning'.[^32] Despite
the fact that the word 'objective' might usually signal an exhaustive account
for us, for Hegel, consciousness that grasps only *objective* essence is not
complete, since it thereby neglects the *subjective* -- that is, consciousness
itself. Only when both objectivity and subjectivity have been united in the same
shape of consciousness can consciousness be the complete **concept**. This will
be the concern of the next section in the *Phenomenology*; for now, we will deal
with the intricacies of the understanding.

In contrast to self-certainty and perception, the focus of the understanding --
that is, the unconditioned universal -- is a *thought*, rather than a sensuous,
empirical, perceivable thing. It is the result of a 'bringing together of
thought'.[^33] This is a necessity if perception is to be surpassed, because
while perception recognised the independence of things (each thing is a One
distinct from others), it fails to recognise the *causal dependence* of every
thing on every other thing, insofar as all things are part of one coherent
reality. Perception indeed *cannot* notice this dependence, because -- as Hume
notes -- causation is not a perceptible phenomenon. The understanding posits
force as the substance of things so that causation, and all other relations
between things, are real, *essential* parts of reality (as opposed to the
imperceptible and unessential elements of perceptual reality which led to the
aporia of perception). When things are understood as expressions of force, it is
a constitutive feature of them to 'reach outside' themselves; thus, the positing
force allows the totality of things to constitute an intelligible whole or
cosmos. This reaching-outside of things relates to Newton's Third Law of
motion:

> *To every Action there is always opposed an equal Reaction: or the mutual
> actions of two bodies upon each other are always equal, and directed to
> contrary parts.*[^34]

Just as, according to the Third Law, an object forcing itself upon another is
always met with an opposing force, so too is the thing of the understanding
asserted (in its independence, and its determinateness) by opposition to other
things. Independence thus requires dependence (on these opposite things). In
this way, the understanding saves consciousness from the aporia of perception by
comprehending the thing's manifold *properties* (which, in perception, had led
to a contradiction between for-itself and for-another) as expressions of a
*unified* substance (that is, force).

#### Genuine Force and Expression {#genu}

As noted above, force is an occurrence; the object of the understanding is thus
not static, but always in a kind of process. More precisely, force is the
movement wherein 'those differences [properties, aspects, etc.] which are
posited as self-sufficient immediately pass over into their unity, and their
unity immediately passes over into an unfolding'.[^35] That is to say, force is
a process of two moments which negate one another: in the first, the manifold
elements of the thing are brought together to make a One; in the second moment,
the One is *expressed* (that is, it *appears*) and thus becomes a Many of
manifold appearing qualities. This process, this movement, is exactly the same
process that brought about the downfall of perception. The difference here, for
the understanding, is that the process is posited as an essential feature of
things -- that is, as something *objective* -- rather than a confusion on behalf
of the perceiver (i.e., as something *subjective*). As Hegel writes, 'the
movement, which previously turned out to be the self-defeating contradictory
concept, therefore here has objective form and is a movement of force'.[^36]

In explaining the movement of force, Hegel gives a name to each side of the
movement: 'genuine force' [*eigentliche Kraft*] is the first moment described
above, wherein a thing is drawn together to make a One, and 'expression'
[*Äußerung*] is the second moment, wherein the thing is expanded into a manifold
appearance. But what causes this movement in the first place? Why is force a
process? Hegel's answer is that it is simply in the nature of force to undergo
the moments of expression and genuine force. For instance, the force of heat
would be meaningless if it did not *express itself* by making other things hot,
and it would be unable to express itself if it was not *genuinely* hot itself.
As Hyppolite remarks, 'force makes sense only insofar as it manifests itself and
poses what is inside itself outside itself'; force is thus 'the unity of itself
and its externalization'.[^37]

#### The Solicitation & Breakdown(s) of Force {#solicit}

Forces express themselves: that much has been established. But what causes them
to express themselves? What causes them to *actualise* their potentiality? It
can be nothing else but another actuality; as far back as Aristotle, it has been
understood that actuality is always prior to potentiality. And in the case of
*force*, the actuality that provokes expression is always another force; a
force's 'expression is represented so that this *other* approaches it and
**solicits** it'.[^38] This is all in keeping with Newton's Third Law: the
understanding now witnesses two forces, one of which is soliciting and active,
the other of which is solicited and passive. These two forces supply the 'event'
of force with the action and reaction that constitute it.

However, at this point we have to ask: what solicits the soliciting force? The
answer (refer again to Newton's Law) is the *solicited force*. As such --
confusingly -- the soliciting force solicits the solicited force, and vice versa
… the two are thus indiscernible.

> The one which is soliciting is, for example, posited as a universal medium
> and, in contrast, the solicited one as the force driven back. However, the
> former is a universal medium itself only as a result of the other being the
> force that is driven back; or, the latter is instead the one that is
> soliciting for the former and is what makes the former into a medium in the
> first place. The former only has its determinateness through the other, and it
> is soliciting only insofar as it is solicited by the other. It immediately
> loses as well this determinateness given to it, for this determinateness
> passes over into the other, or, instead, it has already passed over into that
> other.[^39]

Think, for example, of the moment a tennis racket hits a ball. We might be
inclined to say that the racket is the active participant in the event of
hitting, and that the ball is passive; however, the racket could not hit the
ball at all (nor vice versa) if the ball had not *solicited* the solidity of the
racket. Thus the ball, too, can be seen as the active role. Both the racket and
the ball have solicited one another; therefore, neither is truly *just the
agent* or *just the patient*. Consequently, Newton's Third Law -- in describing
'action and reaction' -- actually 'expresses the *nullity* of force'.[^40]
Although the understanding wanted to grasp objective truth, and attempted to do
so by attributing force to the objects themselves, it turns out that the only
sense in which force is *actual* is in *thought*; force as substance (as the
substance of all things) turns out to be merely a 'play' [*Spiel*] of moments in
thought. 'The realization of force is therefore at the same time the loss of
reality'.[^41] 'Active and passive', 'form and content', are ways of emphasising
parts of reality *in thought*; they are not parts or distinctions of reality
itself. In this way, consciousness has discovered idealism.

And yet, in its desperation for objectivity, consciousness *ignores* this
idealism, and comes up with another way of attributing force to the real world.
Consciousness asserts that force constitutes 'the true background of things';
the world as it appears to us is thus excused from its contradictions (e.g.
between form and content, one and many) insofar as it is merely an *appearance*
of a supersensible Real of force: a world that lies beyond that of our
experience.[^42]

> That is, over and above the vanishing *this-worldliness* [*Diesseits*], there
> is disclosed an enduring *other-worldly beyond* [*Jenseits*], an in-itself
> which is the first and for that reason incomplete appearance of reason, or the
> pure element in which the truth has its *essence*.[^43]

Crucially, the supersensible is 'disclosed' 'over and above' the world of
appearance. Consciousness does not discover it by *turning away* from
appearance; rather, 'it looks *through appearance* as through a veil. It sees
appearance pointing to a stable being beyond appearance, not realizing that this
projected being is itself'.[^44] That is to say, it is *consciousness itself*
that is projected insofar as the 'categories' of appearance, to use a Kantian
term (for instance, 'active' and 'passive' in the context of force), are
products of *thought* and not of *being*.

This Real -- the 'inner' that Hegel refers to -- is a 'pure other-worldly
beyond' to consciousness: it is the result of a projection of thought, and yet
is also entirely beyond the scope of thinking. As such, it is a kind of
**nothingness**, since it is defined only in the negative, as that which *does
not appear* to consciousness -- to use another Kantian term, the supersensible
is not something that can be *intuited*. Consciousness has therefore found
itself in another trap, wherein experience is concerned only with untrue
semblances (appearances), and the Real is merely an unknowable void. Anything
that *can* be experienced is a fiction; for consciousness, 'daydreams themselves
are still better than its emptiness'.[^45]

#### The Law of Force and the Inverted World {#inver}

Finding itself having to settle with either *untruth* (on the side of semblance
and appearance) or opaque *nothingness* (on the side of the supersensible Real
of force), consciousness tries to save itself by once again refining its
position. The 'other-worldly beyond' is now posited as **law**: after all,
'natural laws' both govern (that is, *determine*) the world of experience and
yet also stand beyond it. In describing *the law of force*, it is clear that
Hegel has Plato (amongst other philosophers) in mind. Plato is the archetypal
philosopher of the beyond: he recognises that truth and essence cannot be found
in the world of appearance, since the latter is so constantly in *flux*:

> First, we see (or think we see) the thing that we have just now been calling
> *water* condensing and turning to stones and earth. Next, we see this same
> thing dissolving and dispersing, turning to wind and air, and air, when
> ignited, turning to fire. …  Now then, since none of these appears ever to
> remain the same, which one of them can one categorically assert, without
> embarrassment, to be some particular thing, *this* one, and not something
> else? One can't.[^46]

Of course, this is something fundamental to Hegel's work too; the constant flux
of the world is the *dialectical* character of reality. Now, as described above,
consciousness (at this point in its development, at least) is desperate for
objectivity and stasis; as such, it looks for a way to *ground* this flux in
something stable. This is precisely the role of the law of force: when
consciousness cannot deny that everything is always in flux, and all objects
constantly undergo self-cancellation and self-overcoming, 'it takes the immanent
"beyond-ing" of self-cancellation that appearance *is* and objectifies this
essence as a transcendent Beyond'.[^47] Kalkavage's wording is useful here,
because he clarifies that appearance *is* self-cancellation, by definition.
Since the supersensible is fundamentally negative (it is defined by what it is
*not*, by what it *cancels out*), it is the result of hypostasising the
self-cancellation that appearance is identified as. It is for this reason that
Hegel writes: 'The supersensible is therefore *appearance* as
*appearance*'.[^48]

Law, therefore, is *objectified flux*. It is stabilised instability. As an
example, we might think of Heraclitus's famous saying, that 'everything gives
way and nothing stands fast' [πάντα χωρεῖ καὶ οὐδὲν μένει]: this saying takes
the impermanence of appearances, and renders from them a permanent law.[^49]
These laws are what govern the in-itself: the supersensible *beyond* that
grounds all appearances. Now, insofar as 'grounding' is a relation of two
distinct things, the supersensible must be distinct from appearance. But it
cannot be distinct merely through a kind of *diversity*, in the same way that a
cat and a dog are distinct, because such diversity allows for no *essential*
relation -- and, therefore, no grounding. As such, supersensible and appearance
are distinct by the only other possible kind of distinction: through
*opposition*, or inversion. This is how Hegel's idea of the **inverted world**
comes about. Coming to the conclusion that any object must, in-itself, be the
*opposite* of itself, the understanding is left with no choice but to posit a
second supersensible world wherein everything is the precise opposite of the
world of appearance. 'The *one* is *appearance*, the *other* is the *in-itself*.
The *one* world is as it is for others, whereas the *other* is as it is *for
itself*, so that, to use the previous examples, what tastes sweet is *really*,
or *inwardly* in the thing itself, sour'.[^50] All of this is to say: the
strategy of the understanding has failed; an inner world of force must be
posited when a stable truth cannot be found in a world of flux, but in that
inner world, all that is found is the opposite of what appears. Consequently, we
learn nothing about the objects of experience.
