## Spirit

### Alienated Spirit: Culture

In an interesting passage of his early work *The Spirit of Christianity and its
Fate*, Hegel gives an analysis of the Last Supper.[^1] He writes of the 'bond of
friendship' and the acts that actualise friendship and love, and he takes the
sharing of Jesus's cup to be a paradigmatic case of such acts. But the passage
is most interesting because it is one of Hegel's earliest examinations of
*spirit*. 'Objectively considered, then, the bread is just bread, the wine just
wine; yet both are something more': in the Last Supper, as Hegel understands it,
we see things take on a significance beyond their natural existence -- that is,
we see *spirit* arise from out of nature. We do not have to be religious to
understand his point, since we can interpret it as an allegory: in the bread and
wine that Jesus offers, Hegel writes, the *spirit* of Jesus 'has become a
present object, a reality, for external feeling'. Then, in the consumption of
the bread and wine, the spirit that has become objective 'reverts once more to
its nature, becomes subjective again in the eating'. Hegel gives another
analogy, this time non-religious: 'This return may perhaps in this respect be
compared with the thought which in the written word becomes a thing and which
recaptures its subjectivity out of an object, out of something lifeless, when we
read.' Both the Last Supper and the act of reading have the same structure:
something internal (Jesus's spiritual presence, or the thought of a writer) is
*externalised*, and then (through the eating or reading carried out by the
Other) is *re-internalised* and takes on a new significance.

This motif -- of going outside of oneself and then returning -- is precisely how
spirit comes on the scene. Now, in the *Phenomenology*'s sixth chapter, we are
concerned with spirit in a more sophisticated sense: spirit is not here
restricted to a small group of disciples or to a writer and reader, but is
something permeating societies in general. The harmonious society of Greece was
the site of spirit in its first, immediate existence. Now, before we reach the
existence of spirit as self-conscious in and for itself, we must work through
its second moment, its externalisation out of itself: that is, its
*alienation*.[^2]

Cultural alienation, as we will see, bears a strong resemblance to unhappy
consciousness. Indeed, I would argue that this chapter can be understood as
Hegel's analysis of unhappiness on a *social* or *spiritual* scale, broader than
on the individual scale of the self-consciousness chapter. What it means to be
alienated is that self-consciousness and its ethical substance -- that is, the
individual and society -- are in a conscious 'unity' (as opposed to the
unconscious unity of true spirit in Greece) but nonetheless experience some kind
of separation from each other. In other words, the individual recognises
themselves as part of a society, as a constituent of their social environment,
but nonetheless does not *feel at home* in this society. This runs parallel to
unhappy consciousness wherein the subject felt alienated from a 'God' who --
unbeknownst to them -- was within them from the start. By alienating the
individuals that constitute it, the 'substance' of the social world 'is itself
its own self-relinquishing': it splits itself into two, externalising what is
internal to it.[^3] This is precisely how ethical substance, *as spirit*, moves
into its second stage: in undergoing this externalisation, alienation, or
self-relinquishing, it ascends from out of its immediate existence (which we saw
in Greece) and awaits the return into itself through which it will reach its
truth.

Because of this similarity, and because of what preceded this chapter, we might
be inclined to think that here Hegel is thinking of Christianity as it came to
flourish following the conversion of Constantine. However, we also know that
Hegel took the alienation described in this chapter as a defining characteristic
of *modernity*, and his explicit references (to the Enlightenment, the French
Revolution and the Terror) suggest that he is thinking of the modern era. Robert
Solomon argues that the *Phenomenology* simply jumps from Rome to modernity -- a
'glaring omission' that proves to us that Hegel is not attempting a literal
history.[^4] Fredric Jameson agrees that Hegel makes an omission, but only
because medieval times were the subject of the unhappy consciousness
chapter.[^4.1] On the other hand, Terry Pinkard argues that Hegel, unlike his
contemporaries, did not think of the ancient era as separated from modernity by
the so-called 'Middle Ages'.[^5] On this view, for Hegel as for Nietzsche, the
first signs of modernity are present in the birth of the Christian conception of
selfhood; as such, when I refer to 'modernity' in the Hegelian context, this
should be understood as *including* the medieval era. So, while Solomon is
partially right -- the *Phenomenology* is not a literal history, as I have
explained above -- he is wrong to find an 'omission' in the book. The present
chapter takes us on a route from medieval Christianity through the Enlightenment
and up to the climax of the French Revolution, in a manner that, admittedly, may
be more logical than chronological.

To close the introductory section of this chapter, Hegel gives a summary of the
entire section in one long paragraph. Spirit has become divided, opposed within
itself, and gives way to 'a doubled world'.[^7] Although the world is present
before us, its *essence* is understood as belonging to some 'beyond' --
everything thus 'receives actuality from an other'. Individuals in
self-alienated spirit take the *truth* of the world to be separated from the
world they inhabit, postponed to a realm beyond life. The premodern world was
divided (for instance, into human and divine law), but its inhabitants didn't
acknowledge this divide because they immediately identified with it, on the
basis of 'nature'. In alienated modernity, people actually *acknowledge* these
dualisms and attempt to cope with them by conceptually comprehending them in
various ways. **Cultural formation** (*Bildung*) is Hegel's name for this
coping, for conducting one's life according to these dichotomies that the
alienated individuals have posed. These individuals attempt to transform their
selfhood (as the characters in *Bildungsromane* do) in order to align themselves
with the 'good' side of a dichotomy -- or, as Taylor puts it, 'to close the gap
between themselves and social reality.'[^8]

Of course, all such attempts prevent a *real* unity with the world and keep the
individuals from being at home in their world. This is why, in Hegel's words,
whenever the individual of culture enters 'the actual world' they always 'pass
over again back into actual self-consciousness'.[^9] The dualisms they construct
in order to cope with an unwelcoming actually plunge them back into thought,
closing them off from the world by rendering it as an '*other-worldly
beyond*'.[^10] (This is yet another similarity with unhappy consciousness.)
Hyppolite notes that Hegel's inclusion of alienation within an account of
cultural education is a challenge to his contemporaries (such as Herder, who did
the most to introduce the notion of *Bildung* into German philosophy).[^6] For
classical Enlightenment thinkers, the individual undergoes education in
straightforward upward progress, and for 'humanist pedagogy' nature undergoes a
harmonious development within the human being. For Hegel, however, to undergo
formation and education involves a movement of self-inequality and distance
from oneself -- this is precisely the externalisation I described above.

<!-- Unfinished:
Even though the cultural formation of alienated spirit comes to fail, this does
not mean that Hegel is opposed to all cultural formation, all kinds of
*Bildung*. In his preface, he describes the *Phenomenology* itself as a process
of *Bildung* multiple times.[^10.1]
-->

After the dissolution of the most immediate form of cultural formation, spirit
undergoes two more shapes, both of which are still based on systems of
dichotomies. Firstly, spirit adopts a worldview wherein the world is taken as
untrue in contrast to a harmonious beyond, posited by **faith**, 'which has no
actual present'.[^10.2] Secondly, when this faith is interpreted in the secular
terms of the **Enlightenment**, the 'housekeeping of faith' is brought into
'disarray' as the present world is comprehended coldly in terms of *utility*,
and the beyond is taken to be utterly unknowable '*absolute essence*'. Though
the Enlightenment robs the world of any substantiality, promoting only the
equally empty worldviews of deism or materialism, the priority it affords to the
actual individual paves the way for the **absolute freedom** exhibited in the
French Revolution, through which spirit 'abandons this land of cultural
formation and crosses over into another land, into the land of *moral
consciousness*.'
