#### Cultural Formation and its Realm of Actuality {#form}

The fantasy of harmony and equilibrium in the Greek polis was maintained by a
theologico-political narrative of *beauty*[^13] -- 'the first aesthetic
ideology', Rebecca Comay argues.[^14] The ruins of Greece are not spiritually
empty, however: that the polis could be *deconstructed* proves that it was
*constructed* to begin with, and it is in acknowledging this construction that
modernity is founded. Thus Roman law invents the 'person', whose public
appearance is not a face but a (legally instituted) mask; as Hobbes already
noted,

> The word person is Latin: instead whereof the Greeks have πρόσωπον, which
> signifies the *face*, as *persona* in Latin signifies the *disguise*, or
> *outward appearance* of a man, counterfeited on the stage ... So that a
> *person*, is the same that an *actor* is, both on the stage and in common
> conversation; and to *personate*, is to *act*, or *represent* himself, or
> another.[^15]

To be a 'person' in the modern world is to act out a persona; the atoms of the
Roman world are 'scattered stage props' stripped of immediate
*Sittlichkeit*.[^16] Ancient beauty gives way to modern masquerade. This is why
it is culture, artifice as such, that defines modernity for Hegel. Modernity is
the era in which individuals embrace artifice upon realising that, from the very
start, *the world itself* is their artifice.[^17] 'The task of Spirit', Comay
writes, 'will be to reconstruct an existence amid the debris of empire.'[^18]

Therefore, the world of culture is one wherein individuals are equal not through
legal status or mutual recognition, but through equal *alienated conformity to
the cultural universal*. Everyone relinquishes their individuality -- gives up
their desires, personalities, and so on -- in order to bring the world to its
actuality and achieve oneness with the beyond. Seeing the world as something
alien, cultural individuals aim not to belong in the world but to 'take
possession' of it, precisely by mastering nature (especially their own natural
existence) according to God's will.[^19] *Bildung* is the name for this mastery
-- a word we have seen before, when the servant of self-consciousness worked
with its natural body upon the natural world and, in so doing, became the
*master* of both. The difference now is that the object of *cultural* mastery is
not just a discrete, isolated thing, but is instead wrapped up in the context of
social substance.

By carrying out their life in this way, the individual comes to realise that
their 'actuality still solely consists in their sublation of [their] natural
self.'[^20] We should therefore understand 'culture' as that element of life
which Rousseau was so upset about, through which 'everything degenerates in the
hands of man.'[^21] Unlike Rousseau, the individual at this stage of the
*Phenomenology* venerates culture and is dismissive of nature: they regard
individuality as 'falsely posited as lying in the *particularity* of nature';
individuality is rather found in alienated *Bildung*, in the grand world of
culture that looks with contempt upon the lowly world of our natural existence.
The cultured individual urges us to forget the 'powerless' and 'non-actual'
contingencies of nature; insofar as we are engaged in cultural formation, they
claim, we are all equal before God. (This is the equality of 'conformity' that I
introduced above.) The contrast to Rousseau might remind us of Rousseau's once
friend, turned rival, Denis Diderot. For Rousseau, education ought to liberate
us from the 'chains' that society and culture have imposed on us: 'What must be
done is to prevent anything from being done.'[^22] Diderot, however, saw
education as something positive. In §488 Hegel quotes Diderot's *Rameau's
Nephew* (which he will return to further on), and characterises Diderot as an
'honest' self-consciousness who strives to overcome nature in seeking the
universal through culture.

Without being aware of it, the individual still has a relation to the social
world that it feels alienated from. In the process of cultural formation, 'the
individual empties itself of its own self' -- that is, renunciates its
pre-cultural characteristics -- and *gives itself over* to culture (or, more
precisely, to the institutions, communities, and practices that embody
culture).[^23] 'Hence,' Hegel writes, 'its cultural formation and its own
actuality are the actualization of substance itself.' Although the individual
takes 'culture' to be an alien essence, instituted by God's will, it is in fact
*constituted* by the individual's *Bildung*.

What shape does this constitution take? The individual, which still lives along
the dualistic lines of unhappy consciousness, divides social substance up into
opposing parts which exist through their opposition to one another. The
'thinking' of cultured individuals, Hegel explains, establishes the *difference*
between these two parts by identifying one as 'good' and the other as
'bad'.[^24] The individual thus acts like the 'soul' of their society,
attempting to understand its structure and development by fixing it into rigid
categories. In this sense, the individual actually understands themselves *not*
as an individual first and foremost, but instead as a living expression or
articulation of the culture they live in -- since, for now, they do not realise
that they themselves constitute this culture. We will see the downfall of this
form of individuality when each 'moment' it posits of society -- 'good', 'bad',
or whatever else -- passes into its opposite and the entire categorisation is
undermined.

The first form of categorisation Hegel presents us with breaks society up into
various estates.

> Just as nature explicates itself into universal elements, under which fall
> [air, water, fire, and earth] ... In this way, the inner *essence*, or the
> simple spirit of self-consciousness actuality, explicates itself into just
> those kinds of universal, though spiritual, social estates.[^25]

This is a strange claim. The parallel drawn between a natural division (the four
elements) and a social division (the estates) might remind us of the Greek
system of human and divine law being based on 'natural' gender distinctions, and
this resonance is probably intentional. The difference here, however, is that in
this passage Hegel is presumably only giving an *analogy*, rather than a causal
explanation. Nonetheless, the characteristics that he attributes to each of the
four elements are comparable with the characteristics of the social estates he
describes.

1. *Air*: the element which *endures* and in which 'everything individual is
   sublimated' -- corresponding to the social essence as it is purely in itself
   and equal to itself, and the '**state power**' which renders individuals as
   uniform.[^26]
2. *Water*: the element which stands for 'the real possibility of difference',
   which in its form is 'ever sacrificed' rather than enduring -- corresponding
   to the social essence as it is *for* itself, unequal to itself and
   self-sacrificing, manifest in '**wealth**', the social form of free
   consumption and self-interest.
3. *Fire*: the element of 'individuality existing on its own account', 'a
   self-relating negativity' -- corresponding to the social essence existing in
   *and* for itself, giving way to the rise of real subjectivity and
   self-consciousness. The 'force of fire' in a society is thus its latent
   potential for a revolution which will come about only when its estates
   ('state power' and 'wealth') are recognised as dissolving into one another.
4. *Earth*: the element distinct from all the others which is 'indeterminate'
   but nonetheless is 'the totality which holds together' the other elements --
   corresponding to social essence *as such*, the ground 'from which [social
   phenomena] start and to which they return.'

The cultured world is thus divided into two estates: state power (which Harris
identifies with 'public service' in general) and wealth.[^27] In keeping with
its unhappy dualism, cultural consciousness quite clumsily comes to regard the
former as *good* and the latter as *bad*. State power is understood as the
'unchanging *essence*' grounding all individuals, while wealth is the
institution through which individuals come to realise themselves *as* singular
individuals -- and, since culture despises self-interest and prioritises the
'general' good, it looks with disdain upon wealth.[^28] Again, this is
consistent with a Christian view of society: Augustine divides the world in a
similar manner, into two 'cities', one that lives by the standard of 'flesh'
(that is, individualistic human affairs) and the other by the standard of
'spirit'. 'The earthly city was created by self-love reaching the point of
contempt for God, the Heavenly City by the love of God carried as far as
contempt of self ... The former looks for glory from men, the latter finds its
highest glory in God, the witness of a good conscience.'[^29]

This division is not so rigid, however. We saw in unhappy consciousness that the
believer who surrendered themselves to God was actually self-obsessed, taking
pains over their 'willing, acting, and consuming', and we learned in the animal
kingdom that activity that *seems* purely individualistic is in fact always
public, always dissolved into 'the doing of each and all'.[^30] In the same way,
the 'self-interest' of wealth actually benefits everyone in its production of
*common* wealth; 'each in his own consumption benefits everyone else.'[^31]
Likewise, state power is the source of social stability in which everyone is
able to find and express their individuality. Both estates are intrinsically
related to one another, and self-consciousness thus realises its capacity to
*choose* between the two (or, indeed, to choose neither of them). Do I want a
life of public service, or of making wealth? With regards to the elemental
analogy above, therefore, *self-consciousness has become fire* in its capacity
to choose and judge between the dual sides of society.
