#### Judge for Yourselves! {#judge}

<blockquote class="short epigraph">There is nothing either good or bad, but thinking makes it so. <footer>Shakespeare, *Hamlet*, 1601</footer></blockquote>

Self-consciousness's judgment is conditioned by its alienation; it *judges*
society because it regards society as an external *object* from it. If it 'finds
itself' within the object -- that is, if it feels at home within it -- it
regards it as *good*. On the other hand, 'the object in which it finds its own
opposite is [judged to be] bad.'[^23] Self-consciousness is therefore seeking
'happiness', as Kant defined it: 'the harmony of nature with his whole
end.'[^24] The objects of this judgment are the same as before -- state power
and wealth -- and, at first, it judges wealth to be the good. On this
understanding, state power is an oppressive force that rids people of their
capacity for individual expression; wealth, on the other hand, is the realm of
consumption and production wherein everyone is able to express themselves, while
still nonetheless contributing to society -- wealth 'gives itself away and gives
to everyone a consciousness of their selves.'[^25] This liberal judgment is
made, Hegel claims, on behalf of self-consciousness as it is *for-itself* --
that is, the individual insofar as they are concerned with their individuality
and outward expression.

On the other hand, the individual can also judge society on behalf of their
existence *in-itself*: on this more communitarian understanding, state-power is
the good. It is the ruling power of the state that gives order to our lives and
establishes a context in which we are able to act at all; through the state I
find my 'ground and essence expressed, organized, and activated.'[^26] From this
perspective, wealth only begets a 'transitory' existence wherein individuals
'enjoy' themselves in isolated and specific senses.

This first kind of judgment seems to have reached an impasse. 'There is a
twofold *finding-of-equality* and a twofold *finding-of-inequality*,' Hegel
writes: given that the individual has two dimensions, it is always able to
compare social estates with just one of these dimensions at a time and end up
contradicting itself when it reorients its judgment.[^27] It is therefore
necessary to progress to a higher form of judgment: namely, one which takes the
self to be *in-and-for-itself*, and reflectively takes the self as its object.
The criterion of judgment -- namely, do I 'find myself' within society? --
remains the same. The individual either feels themselves participating in
state-power and wealth as an *equal* to these institutions, and thus is classed
as a 'noble' consciousness, or otherwise they find themselves to be *unequal* in
the face of these institutions are are classed as 'base' [*niederträchtige* --
sipteful, contemptuous, or mean].[^28] The noble consciousness acts with an air
of obligation, gratitude, and respect for society's institutions; the base
consciousness, on the other hand, 'hates the ruler and only obeys him with
concealed malice' and, seeing the pervasion of wealth inequality, is eager for
revolt.[^29]

In *Rameau's Nephew*, Diderot presents a dialogue between 'Moi' (*me*) and 'Lui'
(*him* -- young Rameau). Moi is a *philosophe*; he values culture, music, and
writing, and praises education for allowing us to overcome the 'delicate
constitution' in our nature.[^30] Rameau, on the other hand, is an erratic
hedonist; he deplores the inequality of the world, where some people 'can't even
find a crust to chew on', and he mocks the *philosophes* for their
pretensions.[^31] As Alasdair MacIntyre writes, 'Where the *philosophe* sees
principle, the family, a well-ordered natural and social world, Rameau sees
these as sophisticated disguises for self-love, seduction and predatory
enterprise.'[^32] It seems that Hegel's introduction of the noble and base
consciousness is inspired by Diderot's novel; both Rameau and the *philosophe*
occupy the same world, but they judge it in completely opposite ways, and in
this way Rameau resembles the base consciousness.

> We shall get drunk; we'll pass on scurrilous gossip; we'll indulge in all
> kinds of profligacy and vice. It'll be absolutely delicious. We'll prove that
> Voltaire has no genius, that Buffon, who’s always on his high horse, is just a
> pompous ranter; that Montesquieu is nothing but a wit; we’ll tell D'Alembert
> to stick to his sums and we'll give a really good going-over to all those
> petty stoics like you, who despise us out of envy, cloak their pride in
> modesty, and live soberly out of necessity. And music? Ah, then indeed we'll
> have music![^33]

At the end of *Rameau's Nephew*, the two men finish their conversation and part
ways. Things are not quite so simple in the *Phenomenology*, since these two
forms of judgment still only concern the social estates as they are in
themselves. To be sure, the judging individuals are self-conscious in and for
themselves, but their judgment is born out of the fact that they simply
*confront* state power and wealth as lifeless essences, 'predicates which are
not yet themselves subjects'.[^34] Public service and self-interest are just
goals in the abstract; they are not yet concretised in institutions or embodied
by communities. This, Hegel argues, is the reason for spirit being in two halves
(noble and base) in this stage of its development. To overcome this split, and
to overcome the division between the individual and the estates that they judge,
both essence and judgment will enter into a syllogism. (Here, incidentally, is a
good example of Hegel's characteristic approach to logic: logical order for him
is not something imposed on *reality*, nor is it *extracted* from reality;
rather, existence itself, being a living process, exhibits its own logic; the
task of us as philosophers is to keep track of this logic.) This syllogism will
show how the noble consciousness will (d)evolve into the base consciousness that
young Rameau exemplified, and that the latter is the *truth* of this stage of
spirit's development.
