#### The Feudal Drama and Language {#feud}

<blockquote class="short epigraph">Methinks it were an easy leap,<br/>To pluck bright honour from the pale-fac'd moon. <footer>Shakespeare, *Henry IV, Part I*, 1597</footer></blockquote>

We begin when the noble consciousness acts on its judgment. In their satisfied
agreement with society, the noble individual devotes themselves to 'the heroism
of *service*': they devote their lives to state power, to the public good.[^35]
In doing so, they establish the second estate of the Ancien RÃ©gime -- the
**nobility** -- and bestow actual *existence* onto state power. Through the
renunciation of their self-interest, the noble earns respect; through the
devotion of their existence to state power, they transform state power from an
abstract goal into an actualised institution (the law, the rule of the land,
etc.). However, this institution is not yet truly *embodied*; it has no
'particular will' but is only as 'essential' will, a custom without a
self-directed executive (like a King) to interpret this custom. Hegel refers to
the nobles as 'vassals', who value themselves only insofar as they have the
'honour' of contributing to the upkeep of state power. Nonetheless, for as long
as state power is not embodied in a self-conscious, particular actuality, the
'counsel' offered by the vassal is of little use; the 'general good' is all that
has power.[^36]

In this undeveloped shape, Hegel explains, state power 'is indecisive about the
different opinions about the common good.' It is not yet *government*. There may
be a monarch, to be sure, but the monarch has no being-for-itself on which to
discriminate between the contradictory directions it might receive in the form
of counsel. The counselling vassals themselves, meanwhile, renounce themselves
(that is, sacrifice themselves to state power) only in a qualified sense. If
their counsel opposes the 'general good' -- however indistinct the latter might
be -- their life will be on the line. Having to censor themselves in the face of
the danger of death, 'the counselor in fact reserves for himself his own opinion
and his particular individual will in the face of state-authority.'[^37]
Consequently, it turns out that the noble consciousness is not quite as
deferential as it once thought; the vassal 'is always within a stone's throw of
rebellion', harbouring a latent contempt for the inequality between their
being-for-itself and the universality of state power. Base consciousness is the
truth of noble consciousness.

If it is to retain its being-for-itself, and avoid either dying or becoming a
lifeless servant to state power, the counselor must somehow sacrifice themselves
completely, 'as it does in death', but without dying.[^38] The only way it can
do this is by *relinquishing its being-for-itself*, and it can only do that
insofar as state power is also a self. How can this be done? How am I able to
completely give myself over to something (or, indeed, some*one*) without dying?
In Hyppolite's words, the task is 'to find an exteriority of the I such that
that exteriority still remains I.'[^39] Hegel finds such an exteriority in
**language**.
