#### From Nihilism to Faith {#nihil}

Perhaps the most famous account of nihilism in the history of philosophy is
given by Nietzsche. Both Hegel and Nietzsche see a link between nihilism and
culture, and both understand culture in contrast nature. Nietzsche condemns
modern culture for its espousal of a moral denigration of the natural instincts
of life: culture and its morality are 'a condemnation pronounced by the
condemned', a self-renunciation of life carried out by people who have willingly
subjected themselves to a highest value -- a God.[^72] Hegel's cultured
individual, similarly, is invested in mastering their natural existence
according to God's will. A crucial difference these accounts, however, is that
while for Nietzsche nihilism is the result of a Christian moral worldview, in
Hegel the nihilist is not yet at the stage of Christianity proper. Culture for
Hegel is not the result of a theological crisis, but instead of the dissolution
of social harmony and unity. The 'disruption' expressed by Rameau is precisely
the disharmony of Greek spirit after having come into spiritual daylight (and
being absolutised in Roman law). It is only through the inwardness that this
disruption induces that we will be led closer to Christianity.

It is therefore the disrupted nihilist that truly represents culture -- not the
simple consciousness of the *philosophe*. Only from an incredibly acculturated
position can one do what Rameau does: criticise culture while nonetheless
remaining within it. The simple consciousness, being as simple as it is, cannot
accommodate this seeming contradiction and might therefore demand a 'withdrawal'
from the world. Perhaps culture is not so good, after all! -- If it leads to
such confusion and irreverence as we see in Rameau, what good can it be? Should
we revert to the 'simplicity of the natural heart', the 'backwoods of animal
consciousness'? It was Rousseau that took simple consciousness in this direction
with his condemnation of culture. The disruptive consciousness, however,
embraces that one cannot abandon a world that one is shaped by: 'for even
Diogenes in his barrel is conditioned by it.'[^73]

We find this embrace in Voltaire's criticisms of Rousseau, which are just as
funny as Rameau: 'One acquires the desire to walk on all fours when one reads
your work [the *Discourse on Inequality*]. Nevertheless, since I lost this habit
more than sixty years ago, I unfortunately feel that it is impossible for me to
take it up again.'[^74]

The cultured nihilist laughs about existence, about the 'vanity of all
actuality'.[^75] The most immediate contrast to this laughter is, of course, the
weeping of the unhappy consciousness: the 'teacher' in *Ecclesiastes* also
regards the world as 'vanity', and Augustine despairs at the 'havoc of
disruption' which tears the human spirit 'to pieces'.[^76] Diderot -- and Hegel
here -- are thus presenting us with the comedic analogue to the tragedy of
modern unhappy consciousness. Whether it laughs or cries, however, the cultural
subject in modernity comes to the same conclusion: we are all alienated from
ourselves ('Man is beyond man' -- Pascal), and *contradiction* is the ultimate
truth not only of our subjectivity, as psychoanalysis will also come to
emphasise, but also of our cultured society itself.

Despite his laughter, therefore, Rameau is just as alienated as the unhappy
consciousness of the fourth chapter. Cultural speech 'is the madness of the
musician' just as unhappy consciousness carried out the 'shapeless roar' of
'musical thinking'.[^77] Just as the unhappy consciousness felt irreparably
separate from God, the cultured individual like Rameau 'understands very well
how to *pass judgment* on what is substantial, but has lost the ability to *take
hold* of it.'[^78] Just as the fickleness of skepticism gave way to the
isolation of the unhappy subject, so too does the 'vanity' of *Bildung* pass
over into a kind of inwardness (*insight*) that can no longer grasp the world
'as positive' and must invest hope and trust in some sort of beyond (*faith*).
