#### Faith and Pure Insight {#faith}

The interplay between faith and insight, which is a kind of prelude to the
Enlightenment and its critique of religious superstition, begins with the
alienation of *Bildung*'s disruptive consciousness. Rameau recognises that he
himself is part of the world that he holds in such contempt. Indeed, the name he
is given -- *Rameau's nephew* -- symbolises his cultural *inheritance*, his tie
to cultural actuality.[^79] For Rameau himself, the response to this is nothing
more than laughter. To go further than Rameau, however, would be to overcome
this contradiction of self-contempt by fleeing from cultural actuality
altogether. As such, in resolute resistance to the vanity of the cultural world,
the disruptive subject can take flight to the other, 'non-actual world of pure
consciousness, or of thinking.'[^80] While the subject naturally continues to
exist and live in the actual, concrete world, they work to find fulfilment and
meaning in the world of thought. Perhaps this shouldn't surprise us. It is
common in modernity to suppose that the world around us is too dry and
indifferent -- or, in this case, too vain -- for us to find meaning in it, and
that we must therefore retreat into thought to 'construct' a meaning for
ourselves. As Hyppolite says, 'Man lives in one world and thinks in
another.'[^81] Alasdair MacIntyre claims that Rameau's nephew criticises a world
that is implied by moral emotivism: a world wherein non-manipulative (i.e.,
ethical) relations are impossible because everything boils down to preference
and desire, and there are no impersonal criteria of action.[^82] If we accept
this, then, we can understand faith's flight from actuality as a flight from the
emotivist scenario; the construction of a faith-world is an attempt to establish
a ground for non-manipulative relations between people.

In the case of faith and pure insight, however, we are not quite dealing with a
*constructed* world of thought. This flight into thought is 'only the
*immediate* elevation that is not yet accomplished within itself': only to us,
the phenomenological observers, is it clear that the subject *themselves*
devises the world of faith from a set of projected images. From the subject's
point of view, faith concerns an encounter with content that is irremediably
*beyond* us. As such, in *Faith and Pure Insight* Hegel examines a 'pure
consciousness' as opposed to an 'actual consciousness'. The subject does not
take themselves to be representing or reflecting upon the actual world but sees
themselves as brushing up against that which is totally other. Put otherwise:
the 'actuality' of the faith-world is no actuality at all.

There is a similarity here to chapter four and the enslaved consciousness's
flight into stoic thought. Stoicism's movement from concept to concept stood for
a kind of self-enclosed freedom, just as consciousness's current dwelling in
thought provides an escape from the inanity of cultural chaos. The crucial
difference, however, is that faith and pure insight are concerned with *content*
while stoicism was concerned only with *form*. Stoicism entertained itself not
with 'representations' but with 'concepts'.[^83] On the other hand, and as I
have already alluded to, faith takes its content from the world of culture --
without knowing that it does so -- and constructs a supersensible world through
a process of idealisation or projection, and it is this content which is
criticised by pure insight.

With such a focus on faith, the supersensible, and the beyond, and with talk of
'elevation' that will eventually be echoed in Feuerbach's anthropological
critique of Christianity, Hegel is clearly focused on a form of religion in this
part of the *Phenomenology*. Indeed, faith and pure insight stand in the middle
of the book's triptych of religion. The sentiment of religion began with the
struggle of unhappy consciousness, but the unhappy subject was ultimately caught
in a 'movement of substance-less consciousness'; since faith has emerged from an
experience of ethical substance, it is a more developed form of religious
thinking. However, since faith's relation to substance is one of immediate
opposition, it cannot yet count as religion in and for itself -- this will come
later.[^84]

So much for the generalities of faith. What about pure insight? Why are the two
combined in Hegel's title for this section? In the *Phenomenology*, when the
word 'and' appears in the title of a section, substituting it for the word 'is'
is often revealing:[^85] in 'Perceiving; or the Thing and Illusion', we discover
that the 'thing' of perception *is* an illusion, unconsciously held together by
the operation of the understanding; in 'Mastery and Servitude', we find a proof
of what Rousseau wrote in 1762: 'Many a one believes himself the master of
others, and yet he is a greater slave than they.'[^86] In the case of the
present chapter, however, faith and insight are quite separate; indeed, as in
the case of 'human and divine law', they are best understood as opponents.

The protagonist of the chapter is pure consciousness. Since it is essentially
alienated from a world that it opposes, 'it has in its own self the
determinateness of opposition.'[^87] That is to say, opposition is constitutive
of pure consciousness; for this reason, it is also directed against itself,
opposed to itself. In this opposition, it becomes a 'twofold consciousness', and
'faith' and 'pure insight' are the names for its two facets. We can understand
the difference between the two when we recognise that faith is a form of
consciousness and insight is a form of *self*-consciousness.[^88] That is, while
faith takes the form of mere apprehension, pure insight involves the
*comprehension* which results from a reflective, inward turn.[^89] On the basis
of this idea, Hegel analyses both facets of pure consciousness from three
perspectives: first, as they exist in and for themselves, outside of any
relationship; second, as they are characterised by their (oppositional) relation
to actuality; third, as they exist in relationship to one another, as the
constituents of pure consciousness.[^90]

1. *Faith*

   As we will see, the faithful consciousness closely resembles Pascal, a figure
   who is mentioned only rarely by Hegel. His name does not appear in the
   *Phenomenology*, but in the 1802 work *Faith and Knowledge*, Hegel concludes
   with reference to the 'infinite grief' that arises in the 'formative process
   of culture', and quotes Pascal:

   > For nature is such that it points everywhere to a God who has been lost,
   > both within man and elsewhere.[^91]

   Being in a state of alienation, pure consciousness must assume that the truth
   is outside of it; nonetheless, the inwardness that results from this
   alienation prevents pure consciousness from apprehending an 'outside' that is
   anything more than a projection of its own existence. Faith *is* this
   projection, and thus has content but no insight, no self-reflection. This, if
   anything, is 'infinite grief'. Faith conjures up a representation, 'a
   supersensible world which is *supposed to be* essentially an other' but
   which, in truth, is nothing other than the self itself.[^92] Considered in
   and for itself, faith takes this supersensible world as its 'absolute
   object': 'the real world elevated into the universality of pure
   consciousness'.[^93] The difference between the actual world and the world of
   faith is that, in the latter, the various essences do not undergo a process
   of alienation. Of course, this will have to fail -- we have long since
   established that spiritual development necessarily involves alienation. *Only
   to us* do the essences of the faith-world appear as undergoing alienation and
   movement; for faith, 'their difference is a motionless diversity, and their
   movement is an *event*.' That is to say, the different essences of the
   faith-world appear to faith not as moments of a process, but as divine
   announcements *ex nihilo* -- signs that 'sparkle', in Pascal's words, and
   indicate 'the presence of a God who hides himself'.[^94] These essences
   correspond to the three persons of the Trinity, because the faith that Hegel
   is interested in is specifically Christian. (This specificity might be a
   consequence of Hegel's contingent circumstances; Jameson, however, suggests
   that Christianity is particularly appropriate because it began as a slave
   religion and, like this faith, 'occupied a position of inessentiality with
   respect to the Unchangeable.'[^95])

   Hegel is imprecise in establishing faith's projection of cultural actuality
   onto the trinity, so any reconstruction will share the gaps in his account.
   To start with, faith idealises state power (or the good) as 'the absolute
   essence' (the father), which it apprehends as spirit existing in and for
   itself.[^96] In its spiritual actualisation, however, this essence undergoes
   necessary estrangement and self-sacrifice -- unbeknownst to the faithful
   consciousness -- and 'passes over into *being for others*'; it thus becomes a
   *self* (the son). Lastly, in keeping with the process of spiritualisation,
   this alienated self returns to its origin and both absolute essence and
   selfhood are united spiritually (the holy spirit). Failing to recognise these
   three moments as part of a *process*, faith has theologically reified the
   dynamic phenomena of the society in which it occurs -- 'the flux of the
   actual world', as Hegel calls it.[^97]

   Faith's attitude towards this actual world is the concern of the second
   perspective from which Hegel looks at faithful consciousness. Crucially, the
   faithful subject still 'has its actuality' -- that is, it *lives* -- in the
   real world. It nonetheless regards the world to be one of vanity and
   'spiritless existence'.[^98] Pascal inherited his disdain for actuality from
   the Jansenists, but he stands out from the Jansenists for the fact that he
   nonetheless engaged with actuality, as a scientist. His contention with
   Descartes is not that the latter was *wrong* but, rather, 'useless and
   uncertain': 'Even if [Cartesian philosophy] were true, we do not believe the
   whole of philosophy to be worth one hour's effort.'[^99] 'Torn as he is
   between two realms,' MacIntyre writes, Pascal 'can see each from the point of
   view of the other and his own predicament from both.'[^100] Faith thus
   remains amidst actuality while it scorns it. The difference between faith and
   unhappy consciousness is thus the same as the difference between Pascal and
   the earlier Jansenists. Pascal, as Hyppolite says of faith, 'lives in one
   world and thinks in another': he holds the objectivity of science in one hand
   and the subjectivity of belief in the other. This is the reason for his
   consistent dualisms, and his warning against 'two excesses': 'Excluding
   reason, allowing only reason.'[^101] Indeed, because it still remains with
   one foot in actuality, faith is aware of the criticisms that someone like
   Rameau could level against it. It knows very well that the church and its
   people, and all the substantial elements of its religion, are the 'espèces'
   that Rameau exposes; but it has faith nonetheless, because it rejects also
   the vanity embodied in someone like Rameau. Faith therefore practices the
   contradictory, superstitious kind of belief captured by Octave Mannoni in a
   single phrase: 'je sais bien, mais quand-même' ('I know [that] well, but all
   the same...').[^102] Faith cannot give reasons for its belief, since to do so
   would be contrary to the very nature of faith.

   Faith conceives of the world's vanity as the forgetting, ignoring, or
   opposition to the idea of God entering the world as Christ. Descartes is a
   theist, to be sure, but his God is the 'God of the philosophers', a God to be
   used in proofs and deductions. The world's dynamism and cultural disruption
   are antithetical to the motionless of the faith-world, and faith thus commits
   itself to a life of 'service and praise' in the hopes of uniting with God.
   For the unhappy consciousness, this unity was possible only through the work
   of a priestly mediator; in faith, however, it is established through the
   religious community of ordinary people (by means that Hegel does not
   specify). We are thus in Dante and Luther's era of conciliarist Christianity
   that speaks in the vernacular and rejects priestly authority. Nonetheless, in
   the heart of the *individual*, actuality remains spirtless, and one's
   faithful service is ultimately futile: it can never reach its goal 'in the
   present', Hegel claims -- and the faithful subject might indeed *know* this
   (think of Pascal's wager: in a vain world where God is hidden, only through a
   wager can I grasp his existence). From the perspective of faith, the divine
   and the faith-world are infinitely distant in space and time, and infinitely
   distant from comprehension. Pascal compares God to infinity insofar as we can
   apprehend and acknowledge both of them but can 'know the nature' of neither;
   'we can clearly understand that there is a God without knowing what he
   is.'[^103] Faith is thus reduced to a kind of silence. In truth, the 'beyond'
   it tries to seek is, as we already know, within itself, and the faithful
   subject can only access this inner if it gives way to self-reflection -- that
   is (and here is Hegel's third perspective on faith), if it sustains a
   relationship to pure insight.[^104]
