#### Observation of Nature: Laws of Nature {#laws}

The only way to overcome this problem is to form a new account of the universal
-- one which won't hope for '*inert* determinateness', but instead will expect
precisely what it sees in the observed world: that is, the *shifting* of
determinacy. The truth of determinateness, Hegel explains, is *'its relating
itself to its opposite.'*[^18] The 'instinct of reason' pushes the observer now
to look not merely for 'determinatenesses' in the form of 'distinguishing
marks', but for the **laws** that govern the *relating* of these
determinatenesses to one another -- that is, the laws of their *movement*. A
classification of all things, a catalogue of every object, is not possible, but
a set of concepts -- laws -- that govern these things seems more achievable.
This development of reason is parallel to the previous development of
consciousness from perception to the understanding.

What is a law in this context? And how does it come about? Following Harris, we
can use the story of Plato and Diogenes the Cynic to exemplify the observer's
sense of a law. This is how Diogenes Laërtius tells the story:

> Plato had defined Man as an animal, biped and featherless, and was applauded.
> Diogenes plucked a fowl and brought it into the lecture-room with the words,
> 'Here is Plato's man.' In consequence of which there was added to the
> definition, 'having broad nails.'[^19]

In this story, Plato looks for a 'law' or concept to govern the universal, 'Man'
(that is, the human). He bases this law on what Hegel calls 'those
distinguishing marks, which for each of them essentially consists in not
existing for itself but in passing over into its opposite.'[^20] When Diogenes
shows that Plato's concept is too lose to define humans alone, the concept is
adapted on the basis of further distinguishing marks. Diogenes's action, more
than simply mocking Plato, says something in general about our current
conception of law. The observer is still an avowed empiricist, establishing its
laws and concepts on the basis of experience; as Hegel says, 'the *truth of the
law* is in *experience* in the way that *sensuous being* is'.[^21] The problem
in this strategy is that there might always be a Diogenes who enters the scene
and, in his dirty hands, shows us an exception to our law. No matter how much we
refine our concepts and laws, they will never have *necessity* if they are based
on the contingencies found in observation. A law that is based in such a way,
Hegel admits, is 'not really a law.'

The problem the observer now faces is this: without room for necessity, a law
cannot be a law; however, without room for *contingency*, a law has nothing to
govern. The current sense of law, based simply on observation of contingencies,
clearly has no room for necessity. But this problem doesn't have to last, Hegel
explains.

> However, the law's being a concept not only does not conflict with its being
> available for observation, but is rather the very reason it is in possession
> of necessary *existence* [*Dasein*], and is for observation. The universal in
> the sense of a *rational universality* is also the universal in the previous
> sense of its exhibiting itself *for that* consciousness as what is current and
> actual ... but without thereby losing its nature and falling back down into
> inert stable existence or indifferent succession.[^22]

In these sentences, Hegel is basically claiming that it is possible for
necessity (that is, *universality*) to be found *within* the contingency of the
observer's experience. When he claims that 'the concept presents itself in the
mode of thinghood', he is explaining that the contingent things of our
experience are, in fact, the *manifestation* of the conceptual, lawlike, and
*rational* side of reality. When 'concept' is understood as what he calls
'*rational* universality', it is understood not as the artificial *abstraction*
from observed things, but as the genuine *reality* of what those things *are*.
*Law*, then, is the recognition of the inherent link between rational
universality and the world we observe: if the latter did not have rational
universality as its very reality, it would not be possible to make sense of it
at all. As such, Hegel makes a profound and aphoristic statement:

> What *ought* to be is also in fact what *is*.[^23]

This statement might sound illegitimate, but only if it isn't properly thought
through. It is, in one sense, a critique of the Kantian tradition's postulation
that there is a 'noumenal' world that, despite having no presence in possible
experience, 'is the standard of "pure Reason" by which the phenomenal world of
"experience" is to be judged', as Harris puts it.[^24] As far as *actual
experience* goes, the noumenon is a concept which 'only *should* be, but is
not'; and a concept of this sort, Hegel says, 'has no real truth'.[^25] Our laws
and concepts of the world are of no use whatsoever if we don't find their truth
within reality. Accordingly, the observer is now at the stage of asserting that
'the truth of the law is essentially *reality*.'[^26] Laws are no longer
established by generalising and abstracting from singular observations, but
instead through *experimentation* and inductive reasoning about the observed
world. Francis Bacon himself wrote that 'we regard induction as the form of
demonstration which respects the senses, stays close to nature, fosters results
and is almost involved in them itself'; it is likely that, at this point, Hegel
has projects such as Bacon's in mind.[^27]

As he goes on, Hegel admits that, so long as consciousness 'sticks to
observation', there is a tension between its new conception of law as
'essentially *reality*' and 'the universal in itself'. Indeed, he says, such a
thing as [the observer's] law is not an essence that stems from reason.'[^28]
For an observer that wants to find reason in itself and in the world, this is a
major problem. It arises because, through what we can call the observer's
'inductive method', consciousness is forced to concede that not '*all singular*
sensuous things must have provided evidence for the appearance of law in order
for it to be able to assert the truth of the law.'[^29] This is an intuitive
point about inductive reason, wherein Hegel is echoing Hume. 'Laws' of the
inductive method are arrived at through experimentation; but it is impossible to
arrive at a truly universal law by experimenting on *all* objects. Newton didn't
theorise about gravity by watching *every* apple fall. Instead, inductive reason
arrives only at *probability*, which is not truth. As Hegel says bluntly, 'let
the probability be as great as it may, vis-à-vis truth, it is nothing.'

However, Hegel also acknowledges that, in the actual practice of science, the
inductive method arrives at laws that are firmer than mere generalisations on
the basis of some experimentation. He uses gravity as an example:

> That 'the stone falls' is, to that [observing] consciousness, true because, to
> consciousness, the stone is *heavy*, which is to say, because in its weight
> the stone has *in and for itself* an essential relation *to the earth* which
> is expressed in its falling.[^30]

Though he is not quite explicit about it, what Hegel means to say here is that
inductive law *can* work when the experimenting observer has established not
only the applicability of the law (i.e., its demonstration in experiments), but
also the intelligibility of the law -- that is, an explanation for it. When the
scientist arrives at a basic law of gravity, for instance, they are not just
giving a mere generalisation or 'analogy' drawn from the observation of many
objects behaving the same way (that is, *falling*); in addition, they are giving
a theoretical -- that is, *conceptual* -- explanation of why this behaviour
happens. When the law is understood in these *two* aspects, then it is 'true, to
itself', Hegel writes. 'The law counts as law because it exhibits itself in
appearance and at the same time is in itself the concept.'

Interestingly, Hegel mentions that it is again 'the instinct of reason' that
leads to this more sophisticated account of law; consciousness 'necessarily sets
itself to *purifying* the law and its moments *into concepts* but without
knowing that this is what it wants to do'.[^31] In this process, the concept
which constitutes the nature of an object -- that is, the *rational* aspect of
the object -- begins 'as sunken into empirical material'; it is the scientific
process of experimentation that draws out this concept, by abstracting from the
singular objects of empirical material. Since the observer is now more
interested in concepts than in singular objects, it is increasingly focused on
the realm of the universal: the concepts that arise in scientific research --
Hegel gives the examples of positive and negative electricity, and acids and
bases -- 'cannot last on their own, like a tooth or a claw, and be pointed out
in that way.'[^32] Instead, they 'have truth only in being *universal*.' The
work of the observer 'frees the predicates from their subjects.' However, the
observer carries this process out 'without knowing'. That is, it still
attributes the conceptual content of the law to *consciousness itself*, and does
not recognise the reason that is inherent in the *world*. For this reason, the
observer has gone from one one-sided perspective to another: from a grasping of
only empirical contingencies, to a grasping of 'matters' (acids, bases,
calories, degrees of heat, etc.), which are neither sensuous objects nor
properties of such objects.[^33] A 'matter' of this kind is, in Hegel's words,
'a non-sensuous sensuousness, an incorporeal and nonetheless objective
being.'[^34] Basically, as Kalkavage puts it, 'reason has failed to find an
embodied universal.'[^35]
