#### Observation of Nature: The Organic {#organ}

<blockquote class="epigraph">Nature is what we know -- / Yet have no art to say -- / So impotent Our Wisdom is / To her Simplicity. <footer>Emily Dickinson, *The Single Hound*, 1914</footer></blockquote>

In failing to find an embodied universal, and instead finding a pure law,
standing free from the sensuous, consciousness proves that 'the *truth* of
observation is non-observable reality.'[^36] Its new object is *revealed* in
worldly experience, but is not actually *bound up* in the sensuous world. As
Hyppolite puts it elegantly,

> It is as if an experiment were a *sensuous conception*, an elaboration of the
> sensuous which reveals in it the necessity of the concept. It raises the
> concept, which had been submerged in being, and makes it appear as what it is:
> the dynamism of nature, rather than the static universal of description or
> classification.[^37]

Law had previously fallen apart when the objects it was supposed to govern were
lost in their transformations. A chemical would be transformed in reaction and
no longer be grasped by the same law. Now, however, the observer is prepared to
understand law 'as the unity of a process which preserves itself in its
becoming-other.'[^38] The name for the new *object* of consciousness -- the
object which is understood through this law -- is the **organic**, or the
organism. An organism in this sense is, simply put, a worldly thing *grasped in
the context* of 'the dynamism of nature' and the 'process' of 'becoming-other'.
The organic worldview is a major theme for Hegel, and it is introduced right at
the beginning of the *Phenomenology*, in a beautiful passage in the preface:

> The bud disappears when the blossom breaks through, and one might say that the
> former is refuted by the latter. Likewise, through the fruit, the blossom
> itself may be declared to be a false existence of the plant, since the fruit
> emerges as the blossom's truth as it comes to replace the blossom itself.
> These forms are not only distinguished from each other, but, as incompatible
> with each other, they also supplant each other. However, at the same time
> their fluid nature makes them into moments of an organic unity in which they
> are not only not in conflict with each other, but rather, one is equally as
> necessary as the other, and it is this equal necessity which alone constitutes
> the life of the whole.[^39]

An inorganic account of the world, such as the one held by mechanistic
philosophers like Descartes, cannot comprehend the 'absolute fluidity' of the
world. When Descartes notices a piece of wax change colour and lose its scent
and shape when held near a fire, he concludes that nothing is really *essential*
to the wax but 'that it is something extended, flexible, and mutable.'[^40] On
the other hand, when an object is grasped as organic, 'all the determinatenesses
through which it is open to others are bound together under the simple organic
unity. None of them come forward as essential, or as items that could relate
themselves free-standingly to others, and the organic thus preserves itself in
its relation.'[^41] That is to say, an organic object does not dissolve as soon
as it enters in relations with other beings (and thereby undergoes
transformations). An organism is *inherently dynamic*: being in relations is not
a threat to its persevering existence. The organism *maintains itself*; this is
what it means, after all, to be alive. One final way of illustrating what an
organism is comes from Harris, who says that 'the inorganic thing exists "in
itself" in the totality of ways in which it exists "for another"'; while, on the
other hand, 'the organism exists primitively "for itself".'[^42] His example for
this distinction is the difference between a human and a glass bottle falling
from a great height: while the bottle 'falls as it must' and *inevitably*
shatters, losing its form completely, the outcome of a human's fall is dependent
on some *effort* taken to land on one's feet. The human shows itself as an
organism in the way it uses its internal capacities to (try to) maintain itself.

In the first moments of the observer's discovery of organic nature, the instinct
of reason leads it towards the observation of *'aspects of law'* that govern the
relation of organic nature to inorganic nature. The inorganic nature that the
observer is focused on here is the **environment** that organisms live in: the
'air, water, earth, zones, and climate' are Hegel's 'elemental' examples.[^43]
In the process of maintaining and developing itself -- that is, the process of
*Bildung* -- an organism must *internally* respond to the *external*
environment. As such, a system of laws based on such responses will claim that
the environment in which an organism develops is the determining factor of what
that organism *is* and *can be*. The weakness of this kind of law is found
quickly, however, once we see that it 'does not correspond to the diversity of
the organic'.[^44] One might devise a law that 'animals in northerly latitudes
have thick coats of fur', for instance, but the law will quickly be falsified.
Hegel also points out that the *freedom* that is inherent to organisms also
allows them to wilfully 'exempt' themselves from the determinations of their
environment. Consequently, the role of the environment is nothing more than an
'influence', and 'one does not know what really belongs to this influence and
what does not.' Yet again, the observer has devised a law that isn't really a
law, since it doesn't 'exhaust the range of the organic.'[^45]

Ultimately, the 'environmental influence' model of law fails because the
relation between organism and environment holds no *necessity*. Hegel
illustrates this point neatly:

> as often as a coat of fur may be *found* to go together with northerly
> latitudes, ... nevertheless the concept of a thick covering of fur is not
> contained in the concept of the north.[^46]

In fact, in the way it is posited by the observer, the organism-environment
relation is better described as 'a teleological relation': it is *external* to
what is related and is effectively imposed upon the relata by the observer. In
Harris's words, 'it operates upon the lawful order from outside, and from
"above" it, like the sculptor turning his block of marble into a statue.'[^47]
Organisms only appear to be 'designed' for their environments if we are
intentionally ignorant of the organisms that are *exceptions* to this apparent
design.

The law of 'adaptation' was based on an *external teleology*; that is, a concept
of an organism's relation to its environment which 'seems to fall outside the
bounds of the organic' (and the environment). Residing in neither element, it
couldn't be observed, and couldn't hold any necessity. Some kind of teleology
can be retained, however, if it is found *within* the organism; that is, if the
observer realises that 'the organic is in fact the real purpose itself.'[^48]
This is a more familiar account of teleology for those who are familiar with
Aristotle, and it was also understood by Kant, who recognised the organism as
'an *organized* and *self-organizing* being'.[^49] Nothing truly 'new' is born
in the organism; rather, the organism undergoes changes for the sake of
preserving what it is.

> The organic does not produce something, it only *conserves itself*, or what is
> produced is, as it is produced, just as much already present.[^50]

At this stage, then, the observer finds that organisms undergo changes, and
develop their 'distinguishing marks', by the internal concept of **purpose**
[*Zweck*] that drives them to self-conservation. This is a significant moment
since, in the preface, Hegel referred to *reason* as '*purposive* doing.'[^51]
Laws of purpose are the of the kind that appear in Pindar and Nietzsche:
*'become what you are'*.[^52] Only *'at the end'*, Hegel explains, is it
retroactively revealed that an organism's whole process of change was a
necessary process of *becoming*, rather than one of mere transformation:
'nothing else emerges other than what was already there.'[^53]

Now that the observing consciousness of reason has grasped some kind of purpose
in organic nature, reason is closer to seeing itself reflected in the world.
Nonetheless, reason's journey is still incomplete, as it 'does not recognize
itself in what it finds' in nature.[^54] That is, though reason has managed to
find itself in the world, it is still driven only by *instinct*; it isn't
self-conscious of what it is trying to do, and thus remains ignorant of it. Now,
'instinct' is the subjective experience of what, objectively, we call *purpose*.
This is why the observer is not yet aware of discovering itself (as reason) in
the world: because it is only being guided by blind instinct, it fails to
reflect on itself and realise that this instinct, this *drive*, is itself
evidence of some 'purpose'.

The theological 'argument from design', made by figures like Aquinas or William
Paley, makes the mistake of assuming that purpose-driven nature requires some
superior intelligent being directing this purpose. At this stage of observing
reason, consciousness makes a similar mistake. Instead of arguing that it is
*God* who bestows purpose onto nature, however, the observer might instead
assume that all purpose is projected onto nature by *itself*. Either way,
observing consciousness refuses to accept that purpose is *within* organisms,
and instead recognises it as given unto them: the observer 'makes a distinction
between the concept of purpose ... and self-preservation, a difference which is
really no difference at all.'[^55] This erroneous distinction is easy to make:
if non-human organic beings like flowers and bunnies have no reason, it would
seem that we can only describe their development in a teleological (i.e.,
purposeful) manner in a *subjective* sense -- that is, in the sense that we
*project* a teleology, a <span lang="el">τέλος</span>, onto their development.
But behind this line of thinking is the false idea that *purpose* belongs only
to intelligent, thinking organisms like humans. As Hegel puts it, observing
consciousness 'does not recognize that the concept of purpose is not existing
somewhere else in some intellect but just is here [in the organism] and as a
thing.'[^56] Really, it is inevitable for *observing* consciousness to make this
mistake, since 'purpose' is internal to organic things, and therefore not
observable. To return to the claim of my last paragraph, this is again why the
observer has no adequate understanding of itself: it cannot *observe* reason and
purpose, and thus has nothing on which to base a conception of itself.

Hegel recognises that the observer's current conception of organic nature,
wherein the organism has no inherent, self-concerned purpose, quickly falls
apart. If this were true, then an organism's 'doing would accordingly be empty
efficaciousness without any content in its own self; it would not even be the
efficaciousness of a machine, for a machine has a purpose, and its
efficaciousness thereby has a determinate content.'[^57] In other words, if
organic activity had no intrinsic purpose, it would be meaningless and random.
As Michael Inwood puts it nicely, 'for all we know, bears might light fires or
knit themselves sweaters to fend off the cold.'[^58] Of course, we witness
every day that this isn't the case: there is regularity to the development and
activity of organisms, demonstrating that there is some teleology within the
organism itself, driving its self-conservation. 'In its own self,' Hegel writes,
'the activity [of an organism] is an activity inwardly turning back into itself,
not an activity led back into itself by anything alien to itself', like the
mind of the observer.[^59]

The observer's problem, from our perspective, is that it cannot comprehend the
intrinsic relation between an organism's activity and its purpose -- that is,
the directed *movement* of organic activity towards a purpose. In short, this is
because that relation, that movement, 'can only be grasped as concept', and the
observer is still stuck in a mode of thinking that expects everything to be
sensuous and observable. Consequently, Hegel explains, consciousness
'transforms' the two poles of the *individual* organism and the *universal*
purpose 'into the kind of opposition that conforms to its point of view.'[^60]
This newly posited opposition is the classical dualism of **body and soul**. The
observer now understands the organism as divided in terms of its form: body and
soul are not separate *entities*, but separate senses, aspects, or modes of the
single organism which is 'laid as the foundation'.[^61] What the body is is
self-explanatory. The soul is the 'inner' aspect of the organism, but can
nonetheless be observed, since 'it appears as doing, or the *movement* of
*vanishing* [i.e., changing] actuality'.[^62] To understand this, think of the
Latin translation of Aristotle's work on the soul: *De Anima*. The soul,
'anima', is what moves -- *animates* -- the organism.

The soul expresses itself in all organisms as 'reproduction' and, in animal
organisms, also as 'sensibility' and 'irritability'. Hegel explains what each of
these mean:[^63]

1. Sensibility is the animal's 'organic reflective turn into itself, or the
   universal fluidity of this concept.' This is a rather strange definition
   today, but it can be understood by comparison to the word *sensation*, when
   referring to the phenomenon whereby an animal's nervous system 'takes in' the
   surrounding world, thus enacting the animal's 'turn into itself'. The nervous
   system can thus be understood as the 'outer' manifestation of 'inner'
   sensibility.
   As a sensing thing, the animal organism is something *in-itself*.
2. Irritability is the animal's 'organic elasticity': the organism's capacity
   for 'conducting itself *reactively*'. In other words, if sensibility is the
   *receptive* property of the soul, irritability is the *responsive*
   property. Irritability is the 'actualization' of the organism's
   *being-for-others*, Hegel explains. The 'muscular system' is Hegel's example
   of an outer manifestation of irritability.
3. Reproduction involves both the growth and self-maintenance of the organism,
   as well as the genesis of new organisms. It is essentially the same as what
   Aristotle called the 'vegetative soul'. Because reproduction is the condition
   of possibility for an organism in general, Hegel describes it as organic
   'activity as a purpose in itself'. Through reproduction, an organism is *in
   and for itself*. The 'intestinal system' is one outer manifestation of
   reproduction, Hegel suggests.

The whole point of describing organisms in this way, as possessing a soul with
manifold properties, is so that the observer can devise a new kind of law: at
this stage, laws 'concern a relationship between organic moments in their
twofold meaning', Hegel writes.[^64] The 'twofold' in question is the organism's
*inner* and *outer*: the inner side of the organism is the soul, the
'life-principle', and its properties such as sensibility, and the outer side is
the *expression* of these properties, in concretenesses such as the nervous
system.

The observer looks to construct laws regarding these life-properties, the
'*factors*' of the organism; however, Hegel explains, the search for these laws
exposes the fact that although they might *appear* as distinct divisions of the
organism, they are in fact the opposite: sensibility, for instance, is actually
'a universal *moment* which is essentially undivided and inseparable from
reaction, or irritability, and reproduction.'[^65] The reason for this is that,
when a rational observer (like a nineteenth-century scientist) comes up with a
law such as, 'sensibility and irritability stand in inverse relations of
magnitude, so that as the one increases, the other diminishes', she is ignoring
the fact that these factors -- sensibility and irritability -- are not separable,
wholly distinct quantities, but *modalities* of the same whole (that is, the
organism).[^66] If this is unclear, Hegel makes it clearer by use of an analogy:

> Just as [a] hole and what fills it and what is removed from it are
> *qualitatively opposed*, what is real in them and its determinate magnitude
> are one and the same. ... So too the organic moments [sensibility,
> irritability, etc.] are likewise inseparable both according to what is real in
> them and in their magnitude, which is itself the magnitude of what is real in
> them. The one decreases and increases only with the other, *for either one of
> them has a meaning at all only insofar as the other is present.*[^67]

As such, to construct laws regarding the 'quantities' of the organism's
life-properties is to get no further than tautology. There is really *one*
quantity -- the organism itself. As Hegel writes, 'an organic *existence* is
such a quantitative size ... It is what is increased or diminished, and if it is
increased, *both* [or, *all*] of its factors are also increased.'[^68]
Interestingly, this point was already suggested in the first Kantian *Critique*
when Kant likens a system of science to 'an animal body, whose growth does not
add a limb but rather makes each limb stronger and fitter for its end without
any alteration of proportion.'[^69] Ultimately, The mistake of the observer was
to isolate *moments* of the organism's *life process* and interpret them as
distinct, quantifiable properties of an *inner* that affects an opposing
*outer*. 'The law wants to grasp and express [this] opposition as motionless
aspects', Hegel writes, 'but in being kept apart in that way, they lose their
organic significance.'[^70] Hegel gives a rather opaque definition of the
organism as *the movement of the dissolution of determinations*; this definition
makes sense when we see that the observer's attempt to isolate the moments of
the organism's life process and render them as stable determinations
*necessarily fails* because of the constant movement and interrelation of these
moments within the organic whole. As Kalkavage puts it,

> More generally, Hegel argues that static systems of *any* kind cannot capture
> the Concept of life. Formalism in biology turns life into anatomy: the study
> of the living organism insofar as it is *dead*. ... In using number to
> formulate laws of organisms, reason also reveals it *bond* with the abstract
> understanding. It reduces the fluidity of life to the static being of the
> inorganic. It makes the determinateness of living things rational at the
> expense of what they *are*.[^71]

Now, the observer is different to the Understanding that appeared in the
consciousness chapter, because the **relation** that its laws are supposed to
describe is *objective* -- that is, the relation is found within the observed
object (the organism) rather than imposed upon the world by consciousness. At
the end of the chapter on consciousness, Understanding was transformed into
self-consciousness because consciousness recognised *itself* as the movement and
relation of law-bound objects. For the *observer*, however, it is not the
*relation* but the **relata**, the 'objects' themselves, that cannot be found in
the observed thing. These relata -- which the observer names the 'inner' and
'outer' -- are in constant motion and change, and thus cannot be grasped as
easily as they could at the stage of Understanding. The observer, Inwood writes,
'can no longer get a grip on intrinsically static sides needed for a law. The
sides immediately succumb to the unrest of the concept.'[^72] Or, as Hegel puts
it, 'because the moments are essentially *pure transition*, it turns out that
there are no such *existing* aspects as had been demanded for there to be
law.'[^73]

The result of all this is that the observer has yet again failed to describe
nature in law -- and, more broadly, that reason (embodied in the observer) has
failed to find itself reflected in nature. The systems of law hitherto attempted
have remained too static to capture the endless motion and transition, the
inherent *dynamism*, of the natural world. What can be said with lawful
necessity of a being that is constantly shifting? The organic being, Hegel
explains, 'refuses to offer any *enduring* sensuous differences [i.e.
differentiating qualities] to observation'; or, in other words, 'its essential
determinateness [is] only the *changing flux of existing*
determinatenesses.'[^74]
