## Introduction {#int}

<blockquote class="epigraph">Every philosophy is complete in itself, and like an
authentic work of art, carries the totality within itself. Just as the works of
Apelles or Sophocles would not have appeared to Raphael and Shakespeare -- had
they known them -- as mere preparatory studies, but as a kindred force of the
spirit, so Reason cannot regard its former shapes as merely useful preludes to
itself. <footer>G.W.F. Hegel, <em>The Difference Between Fichte's and
Schelling's System of Philosophy</em>, 1801</footer></blockquote>

### What is the *Phenomenology of Spirit*?

<div class="special">**Phenomenology** (*Phänomenologie*): an account of the
ways in which something appears; an account of the *phenomena* of something in
its manifestation.</div>

<div class="special">**Spirit** (*Geist*): the living, evolving activity of
society and culture, representative of humanity's self-consciousness at a
particular time, represented in art, religion, philosophy, and science.</div>

In October 1806, as Napoleon and his forty-thousand soldiers invaded Jena, Hegel
was nearby, finishing his famous book: *The Phenomenology of Spirit*. The book
has the intended purpose of introducing the reader to Hegel's overall
philosophical project, the 'science of logic'. Though it might seem strange
today, when we associate 'logic' with symbolic languages or the rules of good
argumentation, it makes sense to call Hegel a *logician*. Things are even
stranger when we open the *Phenomenology* and find in it quotations from poetry,
allusions to the Haitian revolution, ancient Greek cults and Martin Luther's
health conditions, prose that randomly alternates between dramatic, profound
imagery and opaque, abstract concepts, and philosophical interpretations of
practices as basic as sense-perception and as complex as organised religion.

Nonetheless, the book has a purpose. It is a *phenomenology* insofar as it tries
to make sense of the phenomena of humanity's various attempts throughout history
at absolute, certain knowledge of the world and of themselves. Of course, this
is a very ambitious project, and as such it is no surprise that the book is
often very difficult to understand. The two-hundred years of its existence have
brought no consensus on its overall meaning: it has been interpreted as a
metaphysical Bildungsroman, a systematic defence of orthodox Christianity, a
revolutionary *critique* of Christianity, and as a text that is
proto-existentialist, proto-communist, proto-fascist, or proto-nihilistic.
Contemporary 'analytic' philosophy originally emerged out of British and
Austrian philosophers completely *rejecting* Hegel, while 'Continental'
philosophy -- in the work of Michel Foucault, Simone De Beauvoir, or Jacques
Derrida, for instance -- has always had Hegel as an influence, at least in the
background.

So ... what *is* the *Phenomenology of Spirit* about? What kind of 'logic' is it
an introduction to? One way of describing the book is that it attempts to
prepare us (that is, people living in modernity) to adopt a completely new way
of knowing ourselves and the world around us. In Hegel's own words, his task is
for philosophy to 'lay aside the title of *love* of *wisdom* and be *actual
wisdom*.'[^1] This 'actual wisdom', for Hegel, is not just a set of facts to be
accumulated; it is not even a *method* for ascertaining facts. Rather, Hegel's
project has concrete ambitions as well as theoretical ones, and all of these
ambitions come out of the problems that he saw in modern life. To give an idea
of the motivation behind the *Phenomenology*, some of these ambitions can be
introduced.

Taking great influence from the Hellenistic philosophers, Hegel sees philosophy
as being fundamentally concerned with living a good life. Life in modern
society, as he sees it, is to some significant degree characterised by the
notion of 'unhappy consciousness': the human spirit is homeless, living an
objectified existence in a world that it *understands* but in which it feels no
sense of *belonging*. 'Spirit, so to speak, floats over the waters of the void:
it is in one sense a god, but more fundamentally, an impotent god.'[^2]
Subjectivity is born out of the awareness of one's *separation* from objectivity
(the world), and until an individual can overcome this separation and see
themselves reflected in the world, they will remain unhappy.[^3] It is central
to Hegel's project that philosophy has a role to play in overcoming this
unhappiness; however, in doing so, it faces the challenge of the many forms of
separation that dominate modernity.

#### Dualism and Reconciliation {#dual}

Hegel sees modern life as rife with dualisms, just like that of the individual
and the world that they are separated from. In his view, the transformation of
religion throughout history was one way that these dualisms came to be dominant.
While the ancient Greek and Roman gods 'were individual and incomplete beings'
like humans, and 'could not satisfy the demands of a universal ideal', the
impact of Christianity on modernity introduced a rift between God, the perfect
and unchangeable being, and humanity, who must remain conscious of our apparent
nothingness.[^4] In the Christian worldview, happiness is found only in the
Kingdom that awaits us after death. This is not just applicable to religious
people, however: Hegel relates the spirit of Christianity to a concrete social
cause. It was when 'the despotism of the Roman emperors had chased the human
spirit from the earth', leaving people oppressed and with no hope for earthly
life, he argues, that real misery on earth ensued and 'compelled men to seek and
expect happiness in heaven.'[^5]

There is thus a modern unhappiness that mourns humanity's separation from the
world, from divinity, and from the universal. As Hegel sees it, the unhappiness
of dualism exists in science and philosophy as well -- and these problems, just
like the spiritual and religious ones above, can also be understood by
understanding modernity's development upon ancient thought. In the modern age,
science underwent a huge revolution, which Alexandre Koyré describes in broad
terms as

> the disappearance ... of the conception of the world as a finite, closed, and
> hierarchically ordered whole (a whole in which the hierarchy of value
> determined the hierarchy and structure of being...), and its replacement by an
> indefinite and even infinite universe which is bound together by the identity
> of its fundamental concepts and laws.[^6]

The 'infinite universe' cannot be fit into a closed hierarchy, like that of the
Aristotelian picture that dominated in the premodern world, and is thus
understood as a mechanistic (or 'corpuscular') totality. It is impossible to
know *every*thing about a cosmos that is infinite, but it is possible to
construct a method by which *any*thing can be known. This is what gives rise to
the image of the universe as 'all-encompassing book', as Galileo described it,
'written in mathematical language'.[^7] Now, the idea that all phenomena can be
explained mathematically implies that, behind the appearance of the universe,
there is some mathematical *essence* that guides everything. Stanley Rosen calls
this 'a kind of materialistic version of Pythagoreanism.'[^8] For everything to
be essentially mathematical means that either there is a Platonic realm of
mathematical essences, or that mathematical structure is imposed by the
subjective mind. In either scenario, we are left with a dualism: one of
appearance and essence, or of subjective and objective.

These scientific and philosophical dualisms -- dualisms of *knowledge*, rather
than of culture or religion -- are a problem for Hegel because they separate the
mind from its objects, the intellect from the 'Absolute' (that is, ultimate and
unconditioned reality). When Kant, for example, claims that we can only have
objective knowledge if we severely *limit* our cognition, and apply it only to
objects as they *appear* to us, he leaves an 'impassable gulf' between thought
and its objects.[^9] Hegel is thinking of this kind of philosophy, which he
calls 'reflective philosophy' when he writes:

> The intellect, as the capacity to set limits, erects a building and places it
> between man and the Absolute, linking everything that man thinks worthy and
> holy to this building, fortifying it through all the powers of nature and
> talent and expanding it *ad infinitum*. The entire totality of limitations is
> to be found in it, but not the Absolute itself.[^10]

In the introduction to the *Phenomenology*, Hegel gives a more specific critique
of reflective philosophy in philosophers like Descartes and, most especially,
Kant. Such philosophers, he writes, regard cognition as 'the instrument by which
one seizes hold of the absolute'; it is an *instrument* in the way that it 'goes
about forming and changing' the objects of thought so that they comply with the
structures of intelligibility.[^11]

<!--
Hegel wants philosophy to help us overcome these dualisms, which 'crystallizes
the modifications of nature, the relationships of life, into mundane realities,'
and extracts all spirit from life and places it in an unknowable figure.[^X] He
wants philosophy to bring us back to the earth and find happiness not in a
divine other world, but in ourselves and our society.

In Hegel's time, Romanticism attempts to overcome these divides by 'feeling' the
absolute.
-->
