#### Psychology {#psych}

Consequently, the observer must observe self-consciousness as an *active*
process, if it is to find the laws that govern it. Hegel actually suggests that,
in taking this step forward (i.e. towards the acknowledgment of
self-consciousness as *active*), the observer is 'guided by the very nature of
the matter which is at issue', though she does not yet comprehend 'the way this
all hangs together.'[^6] Though it's not entirely clear, this might be a hint
that the observer is getting closer to realising *its own role* in that which it
is observing. Either way, the observation of self-consciousness as *active*
marks a decisive move away from *logic* and towards **psychology**, which Hegel
defines as follows:

> Psychology contains the class of laws according to which spirit conducts
> itself in various ways towards the various modes of its actuality as an *only
> found otherness*.[^7]

There are a few interesting things to note in this single sentence. First of
all, this definition makes reference not to self-consciousness but to *spirit*,
both as an active force 'conducting itself', and as something with 'various
modes of actuality'. In this context, we should therefore understand 'spirit' in
two different senses: first, it is the set of 'habits, mores, and ways of
thinking' in which we found ourselves as self-consciousness: this is spirit in
the sense of 'actuality'. Secondly, spirit is that which is *manifest as
self-consciousness*; in other words, spirit is the mental, social, and
historical context which is manifested in every individual self-consciousness.
As such, the 'class of laws' contained in psychology concern the way that
*acting* self-consciousness 'conducts itself' in the context of its contemporary
habits, mores, and so on.

The observer (who, for now, we can call 'the psychologist') finds that
self-consciousness conducts itself in two ways towards the actualities of
spirit. Firstly, it *conforms* by 'receiving into itself' the norms and mores of
its culture, allowing itself to be the *form* to social *content*. In this
regard, self-consciousness '*comes to be according to* these' cultural
phenomena. Secondly, however, the self has the option to *rebel*. Like the slave
from the self-consciousness chapter, the activity of the rebellious
self-consciousness takes the form of *transformative work*; self-consciousness
*makes what is objective come to be adequate to itself*,' Hegel explains.[^8]
This second, rebellious tendency of self-consciousness itself has two varieties:
on the one hand, if 'the individual sublates that universal actuality [culture
and the actualities of spirit, etc.] in an only singular manner', they count as
a *criminal*. On the other hand, if the self's rebellion is 'in a universal
manner which thereby acts for all,' its activity 'brings about another world'
with a transformed spirit, and thus the self is a *revolutionary*.
(Incidentally, it is interesting that, apart from a metaphorical usage in *Force
and the Understanding*, the notion of criminality has its first appearance in
the *Phenomenology* in the examination of psychology. This might lend itself to
a comparison with Foucault's historical work, 150 years after Hegel, which
examines the 'Great Confinement' of the modern age, wherein psychological
classification became part of a legal punitive process.)[^9]

Of course, these tendencies of self-consciousness's psychological activity are
only two among many others. As a whole, Hegel calls them '*universal modes*',
and he is aware that the psychologist cannot help but be 'astonished' that so
many different 'faculties, inclinations, and passions' can reside in *one* mind,
'restless movements' that somehow sit next to one another.[^10] This point
resonates even more today, after Freud's discovery of the multiple antithetical
drives that exist within the human psyche. In all their variety, how are these
universal modes (or 'faculties') to be observed in their manifestations in
individual people? As Hegel points out, it is possible for the psychologist to
simply enumerate the varying 'inclinations' in different people, or their
differing intellectual strengths, and so on, like an IQ test does. But in
practice, this strategy is of little more use than 'enumerating the species of
insects, mosses, and so on,' he writes, because it takes each individual as a
'contingent separation', entirely divorced from the social and cultural
influence on their minds.[^11] If the psychologist wants to find reason in the
individual's psyche, they must acknowledge that 'the essence of individuality is
the universal of spirit.' In other words, the individual's cultural environment,
with all of the actualities of spirit, must inform the psychologist's
observation.

How can the relation between an individual and their 'circumstances, situations,
habits, mores, religion' be understood as *law*?[^12] A psychologist might want
to claim that an individuality's personhood is nothing but a reflection of their
environment; a historian of so-called 'Great Men' might want to claim the
reverse, that a particular era's culture and environment was nothing but the
reflection of the will of a few strong individuals. For Hegel, any such law --
which cleanly places 'the individual' on one side and 'society' (and culture,
religion, etc.) on the other -- is mistaken. This is for the simple reason that
no individual is born entirely separate from their environment. To suggest so
would presumably be a contradiction of the very meaning of 'environment'!
Rather, Hegel points out, individuality 'comes to be in accordance with [the
norms of its environment] *as* conducting itself in opposition to them.'[^13] In
other words, an individual and their environment -- that is, the environment
around them *as they experience and understand it* -- are so irretrievably
interrelated that one cannot be comprehended without reference to another. As
Hyppolite puts it clearly,

> The world that acts on us is already "our world"; we see it through ourselves.
> And we can come to know an individual's world only if we begin with that
> individual. We can specify an influence only if we know the person who
> undergoes it, and thereby determines it.[^14]

This realisation has a fatal consequence for the psychologist: if the particular
relation between an individual and their world is determined *by the
individual* -- that is, on account of individual *freedom* -- how can the
necessity of a *law* enter the picture? Hegel thus concludes:

> The individual either lets the stream of actuality with its flowing influence
> *have its way* in him, or he breaks it off and turns that stream of influence
> on its head [i.e., negates it]. *Psychological necessity* thereby becomes such
> an empty phrase that it includes the absolute possibility that what is
> supposed to have had this influence could very well also not have had any
> influence whatsoever.[^15]
