#### Physiognomy and Phrenology {#phren}

Having found no place for law in the individual's free mind, our observer gives
up her short-lived career in psychology and turns to the more visible aspect of
human existence: the 'distinctive determinateness' of individuality, the
'rigidly fixed being' of an individual's actuality: that is, the **body**.[^16]
This move seems plausible: it seems intuitive that the body is an actuality
closer to an individual's 'inner life' than the actualities of spirit explored
above. In ancient times, Plato had supposed that the human body was designed by
the gods to house the soul, and that every basic function of the body could be
traced back to this purpose.[^17] In Hegel's own era, scientists like Johann
Kaspar Lavater revived the discipline of 'physiognomy', claiming that one could
discern somebody's character and personality based on an observation of their
physical appearance (especially, in the case of Lavater, of the face). In this
final part of *Observing Reason*, Hegel will criticise physiognomy and
phrenology as forms of pseudoscience; their shortcomings, we will see, are
somewhat similar to those of psychology.

For the physiognomist, Hegel says, the body is an outer **sign** of an
individual's inner life. Indeed, since we cannot literally peer inside the mind
of a person, we rely on the body and its activity (facial expressions, speech,
and so no) as it 'makes known what he [the person] *is*, in the sense of putting
his original nature into practice.' With this idea, we arrive at another
formulation of the 'outer-expressing-inner' motif that appears so often in the
*Phenomenology*. The body is understood as a kind of 'record', signifying what
the individual *has done*: it is the congealed history of an individual's
activity.[^18] According to some, this idea is a classic element of
Enlightenment thinking; as Adorno and Horkheimer wrote, 'animism spiritualized
the object, whereas industrialism [of the modern, 'enlightened' era] objectifies
the spirits of men.'[^19] Quite quickly, however, Hegel takes apart this
ambitious idea that the appearance of our bodies is a tell-tale sign of what
lies within us. First of all, he points out that the process of human *acting*
isn't rightly understood as something 'inner' eventually manifesting as
something 'outer'; rather, 'the inner ... is the *activity* itself.'[^20] An
individual's activity is nothing at all until it is acted out, so we have no
basis for supposing some prior, 'inner' cause of the activity. Alasdair
MacIntyre puts this criticism in the following way:

> When we see someone with a sad expression on his face, we do not infer to an
> inner sadness he feels on the basis of an observed correlation between such a
> physical arrangement of the facial features and inner states of sadness. We
> read or interpret the expression as one of sadness in the light of the
> conventions in our culture for interpreting facial expressions.[^21]

MacIntyre's reference to our *interpretation* ('in light of conventions') of
bodily expression leads to Hegel's second point; namely, that when our activity
becomes visible to others through our facial expression, body language, and so
on, it becomes 'an actuality cut off from the individual.'[^22] When individual
activity is 'publicly' manifested, the actor has no authority on what this
activity 'means', signifies, and so on. In Hegel's words, 'language and labor'
-- that is, all the visible activities of an individual -- 'are expressions in
which the individual on his own no longer retains and possesses himself; rather,
he lets the inner move wholly outside of him and he thus *abandons it to the
other*.'[^23]

These first two points lead to a third: as Hegel puts rather opaquely, 'we can
just as well say that these expressions express the inner too much as we can say
that they express it too little.' Imagine that I mean to act in a certain way,
and that my activity doesn't deceive me: my 'meaning' is interpreted by an Other
accurately. Now, as previously stated, there is really no difference between my
'meaning' and the activity itself; consequently, 'no opposition remains between
[the activity] and the inner', and there is thus no 'relation' within which the
observer can find a law.

Finding no stable law within the *activity* of a body, the physiognomist can
still turn to the *features* of a body to try an access an individual's inner
life. Rather than the words that someone's voice speaks, or the gestures that
their hands perform, the physiognomist can instead look to the '*tone* and
*range* of the voice', and 'the *simple lines of the hand*', taking these
features to be signs of something inner.[^24] There are two advantages to this
strategy: first of all, like the signs (that is, 'signifiers') in language,
these features are stable and consistent, especially when compared to the
fluidity of body language and vocal expression. Secondly, in Hegel's words, 'the
*organ* of activity is just as *much* a *being* as it is a doing': that is to
say, body parts like the mouth and hand are so central and essential to an
individual's activity that, in a sense, what they *are* is simply what the
individual *does*. It is 'the hand by which a person brings himself to appearance
and actualizes himself', Hegel writes: 'It is the ensouled artisan of his
fortune.'[^25]
