#### Phrenology {#phreno}

Hegel recognises phrenology as the 'one relationship left over': the only way
that remains for the observer to understand the relationship between the
individual and spirit.[^34] Psychology considered the spirit of the individual
to be formed in relationship to their external surroundings; physiognomy located
spirit as something signified by the *outer* aspect of the individual, and was
therefore more 'zoomed-in' to the individual than psychology was. Phrenology
zooms in even closer, understanding spirit to *be* -- and not merely to be
*expressed by* -- the individual's 'immediate, fixed, purely existing
actuality': namely, the **skull**. As Slavoj Žižek writes,

> The final result of physiognomy is its utter *failure*: every signifying
> representation 'betrays' the subject; it perverts, deforms what it is supposed
> to reveal; there is no 'proper' signifier of the subject. And the passage from
> physiognomy to phrenology functions as the change of level from
> *representation* to *presence*: in opposition to gestures and grimaces, the
> skull is not a sign expressing an interior; it represents nothing; it is -- in
> its very inertia -- the immediate presence of the Spirit.[^35]

It is quite surprising that *Observing Reason*, a huge section of the
*Phenomenology* that deals with the development of natural sciences, should come
to its climax with a theory as pseudoscientific and utterly obsolete as
phrenology. It makes sense, however, when we consider that phrenology marks the
final *reductio ad absurdum* of reason that is content to merely *observe*: for
as long as we ignore that the real rationality of humanity is in our *social
activity*, in our *deeds* that realise us and leave a mark on the world after
our death, we will always end up with a picture of the human spirit as something
dead and abstract: '*spirit is a bone*', the phrenologist will (ridiculously)
come to conclude.[^36] Indeed, Hegel will actually briefly return to phrenology
in his final chapter (§790), reflecting on how it *proves* that, when taken as
devoid of activity, sociality, and culture, spirit is nothing at all.

Why is it the *skull* in particular that the observer chooses as the immediate
actuality of its focus? To start with, Hegel points out that the majority of
bodily organs are, as the physiognomist recognised, 'mediating middles' between
the individual and the external world: the hands physically manipulate the
world, the sexual organs look to reproduce the individual, and so on. In this
sense, most organs are 'instruments'.[^37] In trying to find not a signifier of
spiritual individuality, but instead *individuality itself*, the observer must
find an organ wherein 'the individual is not turned outwards but is instead
reflected in his action' -- that is, an organ which is *for itself*. What about
the brain and the spinal cord? Taken together, this system 'may be considered as
the immediate presence of self-consciousness persisting within itself', Hegel
writes.[^38] Indeed, as soon as it becomes visible to an Other, 'it is a dead
being' that has lost its functionality. Is this not a sign of an organ that is
exclusively for-itself? However, the *activity* of the brain and spinal cord, no
matter how inwardly contained it might be, is active *for the sake of*
articulating the body in any particular way; as such, Hegel explains that

> the *being* reflected-into-itself of spirit in the brain itself is again only
> a mediating middle between its pure essence and its bodily articulation, a
> middle which must thus have the nature of both and also of the *existing*
> articulation in it.[^39]

The observer is thus forced to 'step back' further, and focus on the *skull* and
*spinal column*: the 'motionless fixed things' that indifferently encase the
brain and spinal cord. Now, as Hegel understands it, the phrenologist is focused
only on the skull (and not the spinal column) for two reasons: firstly, 'anyone
who thinks of the genuine location of spirit thinks not of the spine but only of
the head'; secondly, since 'knowing and acting' (or the instructions telling the
body and mind to act and to know) are driven 'through the spine', the spine
cannot be seen as a stable site of spirit.[^40] The phrenologist is thus left
with the skull, the *'caput mortuum'* (dead head), as her object of focus.

Having arrived at the skull as the supposed location of spirit, the first task
of the phrenologist is to understand the *causal relationship* between the
spirit, embodied in the skull, and the individual's body (specifically, the
brain, since this is the body part most directly related to the skull). This
might be a simple case of causation in one direction: perhaps the brain itself
is able to 'press the skull', 'widen it or flatten it', and so on;
alternatively, perhaps it is the skull that 'presses on the brain' and thus
determines the boundaries and capacities of the brain.[^41] Franz Joseph Gall,
the originator of phrenology, believed the former. It seems that a phrenologist
would be *unable* to believe the latter; since, if the skull influences the
brain, it therefore influences the individual's knowing and acting, too -- and
this externalisation of the skull's influence would deny its existence as purely
*for itself*. Of course, the causal relation between skull and brain might not
be simple and one-way: there is also the possibility of a 'pre-established
harmony' determining the form of brain *and* skull at the same time. Now, while
this notion of pre-established harmony is found famously in *Leibniz's* work,
Hegel points out that this kind of skull-brain harmony wouldn't necessarily
imply an actual *correspondence* between skull and brain. They would have the
same loose relation as that of 'the form of the grape and the taste of
wine'.[^42] Consequently, even though this pre-established harmony between the
skull and the brain is the closest to the *actual truth* of the matter, it is
rejected by the phrenologist.
