## Introduction {#int}

### Hegel's Project

<div class="special">**Phenomenology** (*Phänomenologie*): an account of the
ways in which something appears; an account of the *phenomena* of something in
its manifestation.</div>

<div class="special">**Spirit** (*Geist*): the living, evolving activity of
society and culture, representative of humanity's self-consciousness at a
particular time, represented in art, religion, philosophy, and science.</div>

In October 1806, as Napoleon and his forty-thousand soldiers invaded Jena, Georg
Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel (1770-1831) was nearby, finishing his famous book: *The
Phenomenology of Spirit*. The book has the intended purpose of introducing the
reader to Hegel's overall philosophical project, the 'science of logic'. Though
it might seem strange today, when we associate 'logic' with symbolic languages
or the rules of good argumentation, it makes sense to call Hegel a *logician*,
in a unique sense that we will come to understand. Things are even stranger when
we open the *Phenomenology* and find in it quotations from poetry, allusions to
the Haitian revolution, Ancient Greek cults and Martin Luther's health
conditions, prose that randomly alternates between dramatic, profound imagery
and opaque, abstract concepts, and philosophical interpretations of practices as
basic as sense-perception and as complex as organised religion.

Nonetheless, the book has a purpose. It is a *phenomenology* insofar as it tries
to make sense of the phenomena of humanity's various attempts throughout history
at absolute, certain knowledge of the world and of themselves. Of course, this
is a very ambitious project, and as such it is no surprise that the book is
often very difficult to understand. The two-hundred years of its existence have
brought no consensus on its overall meaning: it has been interpreted as a
metaphysical Bildungsroman, a systematic defence of orthodox Christianity, a
revolutionary *critique* of Christianity, and as a text that is
proto-existentialist, proto-communist, proto-fascist, or proto-nihilistic.
Contemporary 'analytic' philosophy originally emerged out of British and
Austrian philosophers completely *rejecting* Hegel, while 'Continental'
philosophy -- in the work of Michel Foucault, Simone De Beauvoir, or Jacques
Derrida, for instance -- has always had Hegel as an influence, at least in the
background.

The general aim of this writing is to provide a commentary on Hegel's
*Phenomenology*, with frequent reference to other texts both from the
contemporary era and from Hegel's time. Any great intellectual or artistic work
of history seems to me to be infinitely deep, and the same is true for the
*Phenomenology of Spirit*. It would presumably be possible to research this book
(and any other great book) for the rest of a lifetime and still find something
new every day. We therefore have to be limited by a particular *purpose*; the
purpose of my commentary is to hopefully make the *Phenomenology* a little
easier to read, and put it in some degree of historical and philosophical
context.

So ... what *is* the *Phenomenology of Spirit* about? What kind of 'logic' is it
an introduction to? One way of describing the book is that it attempts to
prepare us (that is, people living in modernity) to adopt a completely new way
of knowing ourselves and the world around us. In Hegel's own words, his task is
for philosophy to 'lay aside the title of *love* of *wisdom* and be *actual
wisdom*.'[^1] This 'actual wisdom', for Hegel, is not just a set of facts to be
accumulated; it is not even a *method* for ascertaining facts. Rather, Hegel's
project has concrete ambitions as well as theoretical ones, and all of these
ambitions come out of the problems that he saw in modern life. To give an idea
of the motivation behind the *Phenomenology*, some of these ambitions can be
introduced.

Taking great influence from the Hellenistic philosophers, Hegel sees philosophy
as being fundamentally concerned with living a good life. Life in modern
society, as he sees it, is to some significant degree characterised by the
notion of 'unhappy consciousness': the human spirit is homeless, living an
objectified existence in a world that it *understands* but in which it feels no
sense of *belonging*. 'Spirit, so to speak, floats over the waters of the void:
it is in one sense a god, but more fundamentally, an impotent god.'[^2]
Subjectivity is born out of the awareness of one's *separation* from objectivity
(the world), and until an individual can overcome this separation and see
themselves reflected in the world, they will remain unhappy.[^3] It is central
to Hegel's project that philosophy has a role to play in overcoming this
unhappiness; however, in doing so, it faces the challenge of the many forms of
separation that dominate modernity.

This introduction refers to the 'Introduction' and 'Preface' to Hegel's book, as
well as some other writings by Hegel, in order to establish the context and
general workings of his project.

#### Dualism {#dual}

Hegel sees modern life as rife with dualisms, just like that of the individual
and the world that they are separated from. In his view, the transformation of
religion throughout history was one way that these dualisms came to be dominant.
While the Ancient Greek and Roman gods 'were individual and incomplete beings'
like humans, and 'could not satisfy the demands of a universal ideal', the
impact of Christianity on modernity introduced a rift between God, the perfect
and unchangeable being, and humanity, who must remain conscious of our apparent
nothingness.[^4] In the Christian worldview, happiness is found only in the
Kingdom that awaits us after death. This is not just applicable to religious
people, however: Hegel relates the spirit of Christianity to a concrete social
cause. It was when 'the despotism of the Roman emperors had chased the human
spirit from the earth', leaving people oppressed and with no hope for earthly
life, he argues, that real misery on earth ensued and 'compelled men to seek and
expect happiness in heaven.'[^5]

There is thus a modern unhappiness that mourns humanity's separation from the
world, from divinity, and from the universal. As Hegel sees it, the unhappiness
of dualism exists in science and philosophy as well -- and these problems, just
like the spiritual and religious ones above, can also be understood by
understanding modernity's development upon ancient thought. In the modern age,
science underwent a huge revolution, which Alexandre Koyré describes in broad
terms as

> the disappearance ... of the conception of the world as a finite, closed, and
> hierarchically ordered whole (a whole in which the hierarchy of value
> determined the hierarchy and structure of being...), and its replacement by an
> indefinite and even infinite universe which is bound together by the identity
> of its fundamental concepts and laws.[^6]

The 'infinite universe' cannot be fit into a closed hierarchy, like that of the
Aristotelian picture that dominated in the premodern world, and is thus
understood as a mechanistic (or 'corpuscular') totality. It is impossible to
know *every*thing about a cosmos that is infinite, but it is possible to
construct a method by which *any*thing can be known. This is what gives rise to
the image of the universe as 'all-encompassing book', as Galileo described it,
'written in mathematical language'.[^7] Now, the idea that all phenomena can be
explained mathematically implies that, behind the appearance of the universe,
there is some mathematical *essence* that guides everything. Stanley Rosen calls
this 'a kind of materialistic version of Pythagoreanism.'[^8] For everything to
be essentially mathematical means that either there is a Platonic realm of
mathematical essences, or that mathematical structure is imposed by the
subjective mind. In either scenario, we are left with a dualism: one of
appearance and essence, or of subjective and objective.

These scientific and philosophical dualisms -- dualisms of *knowledge*, rather
than of culture or religion -- are a problem for Hegel because they separate the
mind from its objects, the intellect from the 'Absolute' (that is, ultimate and
unconditioned reality). When Kant, for example, claims that we can only have
objective knowledge if we severely *limit* our cognition, and apply it only to
objects as they *appear* to us, he leaves an 'impassable gulf' between thought
and its objects.[^9] Hegel is thinking of this kind of philosophy, which he
calls 'reflective philosophy', when he writes:

> The intellect, as the capacity to set limits, erects a building and places it
> between man and the Absolute, linking everything that man thinks worthy and
> holy to this building, fortifying it through all the powers of nature and
> talent and expanding it *ad infinitum*. The entire totality of limitations is
> to be found in it, but not the Absolute itself.[^10]

In the introduction to the *Phenomenology*, Hegel gives a more specific critique
of reflective philosophy in philosophers like Descartes and, most especially,
Kant. Such philosophers, he writes, regard cognition as 'the instrument by which
one seizes hold of the absolute'; it is an *instrument* in the way that it 'goes
about forming and changing' the objects of thought so that they comply with the
structures of intelligibility.[^11] The problem with cognition in the
instrumental sense is that it leaves behind a 'thing in itself': the absolute
remains completely unknown. If we subtract from our thoughts all the
modifications that cognition places on its objects, we are left with what we had
prior to these modifications: namely, nothing. Likewise, if we understand
cognition as a 'medium' through which we experience the world (like a set of
glasses that make objects intelligible to us), then we cannot 'undo' the
qualification of this medium without ending up where we started: with an
indeterminate, unintelligible nothingness.

Hegel was opposed to this epistemological dualism, wherein 'the absolute stands
*on one side* and ... *cognition stands on the other*', and the task of the
philosopher is therefore to 'fuss about', establishing the structure and rules
of thinking before actually *getting on* with thinking itself.[^12] 'Fear of
erring,' he says famously, 'is already the error itself.'[^13] His
discomfort with this strategy of establishing rules and concepts before they
enter their living context explains some of the *Phenomenology*'s difficulty:
its concepts and ideas are not established prior to being put to use; rather, it
is up to us to realise what they mean *through* the very manner in which they
are used.

Hegel wants philosophy to help us overcome the prevalence of dualism, which
'crystallizes the modifications of nature, the relationships of life, into
mundane realities,' and extracts all spirit from life and places it in an
unknowable figure (God, the thing in itself, etc).[^14] He wants philosophy to
bring us back to the earth and find happiness not in a divine other world, but
in ourselves and our society. Accordingly, he favours a *speculative* philosophy
over a reflective one; 'The principle of speculation', he writes, 'is the
*identity* of subject and object.'[^15] His approach to overcoming the dualisms
described above -- dualisms of the individual and the world, the knower and the
known, and so on -- is the *reconcile* subject to object, and vice versa. In
fact, he sees this as the task of philosophy as such: though he claims that
'life eternally forms itself by setting up oppositions', 'what Reason opposes
... is just the absolute fixity which the intellect gives to the
dichotomy.'[^16]

> When the might of union vanishes from the life of men and the antitheses lose
> their living connection and reciprocity and gain independence, the need of
> philosophy arises.[^17]

If the dualisms of culture and philosophy are not to be overcome by a philosophy
whose structure is worked out ahead of time, then philosophy must instead *enter
into* the problems, *in medias res*, and work them out from within. This is how
the *Phenomenology*'s preface begins: like Aristotle, Hegel begins by looking
out upon his contemporary landscape and assessing its various ways of thinking.
How have other philosophers tried to find unity against dualism? Why have they
failed (in Hegel's view)?
