### The Preface {#pref}

<blockquote class="epigraph">The last thing one discovers in composing a work is what has to be put first. <footer>Pascal, *Pensées*, 1670</footer></blockquote>

#### Hegel's Romanticism and Anti-Romanticism {#roma}

At the start of Hegel's philosophical career, a trend of counter-Enlightenment
thought was growing in Germany, with the *'Sturm und Drang'* group -- influenced
by Shakespeare and Rousseau, represented by J. G. Hamann, J. G. Herder and, to a
lesser degree, Goethe and Schiller -- and the later *Frühromantik* (early
Romanticism) movement, represented by the Schlegel brothers, Caroline and
Friedrich Schelling, and the poet Novalis, among others.[^18] These thinkers
worked not only in philosophy but also in literature, literary criticism, and
theology, and their shared commitment was to challenge the Enlightenment's focus
on reason and mechanism with heartfelt appeals to emotion, passion, love, and so
on. The general spirit of German Romanticism can be ascertained through a few
quotations.

> Love is the final goal of *world history* -- the One of the universe.[^19]

> Since practical spirit was locked into a monotonous world of objects, and
> there further restricted by formulation, the free whole receded from view,
> becoming likewise impoverished. ... Consequently, the abstract thinker very
> often has a *cold* heart, since he dissects the impressions that can touch his
> soul only in their entirety.[^20]

> To live classically and to realize antiquity practically within oneself is the
> summit and goal of philology.[^21]

Romantic philosophy is opposed to dualism, opposed to the abstract
objectification and analysis that Enlightenment philosophy imposed upon nature,
and seeks to remedy this mistake by appeal to a grand *unity*, which could be
love or even life itself. As Charles Taylor puts it, the Romantics were
'responsible for developing an alternative anthropology, one centred on the
categories of *expression*'.[^22]

As one of the above quotations shows, the Romantics were also profoundly
influenced by Ancient Greece and Rome -- or, at least, their idealised version
of them. This influence had in part been brought about by Johann Joachim
Winckelmann (1717-1768), the first 'art historian' in the modern sense, who
idolised Ancient Greece and attributed a universal, timeless value to its
artwork. Incidentally, Winckelmann never travelled to Greece, and was often
unaware that the artworks he studied were in fact Roman replicas; nonetheless,
his aesthetic veneration of Greek antiquity and his insistence that art should
be studied as an expressive part of life (and not as an object of detached
analysis) had an enormous effect on German artists and writers, leading to what
has been called 'the tyranny of Greece over Germany.'[^23] Winckelmann's
writings accompanied Goethe on his trip to Italy, and Herder claimed to read
them 'with a feeling like that of a youth on a fine morning, like the letter of
a far-distant bride, from a happy time that is past.'[^24]

As mentioned above, Hegel shared this attitude about antiquity. His belief that
Ancient Greece and Rome enjoyed a greater unity of individual and society, life
and art, and so on, was inherited from the generation of Winckelmann-inspired
Romantics. In an essay on love, written nearly a decade before the
*Phenomenology*, Hegel's early Romanticism is plain to see:

> True union, or love proper, exists only between living beings who are alike in
> power ... This genuine love excludes all oppositions. It is not the
> understanding, whose relations always leave the manifold of related terms as a
> manifold and whose unity is always a unity of opposites [left as opposites].
> It is not reason either, because reason sharply opposes its determining power
> to what is determined. Love neither restricts nor is restricted; it is not
> finite at all. It is a feeling, yet not a single feeling.[^25]

Like the Romantics, the early Hegel sees love and the passionate phenomena of
life as the real source of unity -- not the intellect. His insistence that true
love exists only among beings 'alike in power' is a criticism of the Christian
notion of love, between human and God. It is difficult for a finite human to
love a being that is infinite and unknowable; such a relationship is more
comparable to that of a master and slave. Thus, while Christianity has
'oscillated to and fro' between the dualism of God and world, 'it is its fate
that ... piety and virtue, spiritual and worldly action, can never dissolve into
one.'[^26]

So, rather than trying to appeal to God, or to first establish the structure of
knowledge, the Romantics claimed that a kind of *immediate*, *intuitive*
knowledge was the criterion for truth. The absolute must be *felt*, not proven
or intellectually comprehended. This was also the view of Friedrich Heinrich
Jacobi (1743-1819), who had such a radical emphasis on faith that even the
Romantics were too rationalist for him. Jacobi argued that, in attempting to
prove any of our beliefs, we must eventually stop somewhere; there must be some
final, *unproved* point upon which our beliefs rest. He thus urged his
contemporaries to take a *salto mortale*, a daring leap, to *embrace* the faith
upon which our knowledge rests.[^27]

Hegel is set apart from Jacobi, the *Sturm und Drang* movement, and the
Romantics by his refusal to rely on an immediate, foundational grounding for
knowledge. While he was influenced by the Romantic admiration for antiquity, and
by their attempts to overcome dualism and disunity, Hegel came to insist that
only *logic* -- rather than faith, imagination, or feeling -- has the power to
establish unity. Thus, Richard Kroner writes:

> While the Romanticists were content with denying ultimate separation,
> indulging in pictorial language and paradoxes to give force to their negation,
> Hegel tried to demonstrate that distinctions break down before the tribunal of
> logic. He was convinced that the more accurately we think, the clearer becomes
> the impossibility of drawing clearly defined boundaries between our
> concepts.[^28]

Romanticism, as Hegel came to see it, was not concerned with *accurate thinking*
at all. In the *Phenomenology*'s Preface, he suggests that the Romantics were
reacting against the *disenchantment* brought upon the world by the science of
modernity. (Indeed, when the term 'disenchantment' was brought into sociology by
Max Weber, it was borrowed from the writing of Schiller, the Romantic.) However,
instead of finding an alternative to this disenchantment by progressing through
modernity and developing human thought, Romanticism called for a return to the
spirit of pre-modern *religion*. 'What it wants from philosophy is not so much
*insight* as *edification*,' Hegel remarked.[^29] The task of Romantic
philosophy, in Hegel's terms, is just 'to take what thought has torn asunder
[that is, dualisms] and then to stir it all together into a smooth mélange, to
*suppress* the concept that makes those distinctions, and then to fabricate the
*feeling* of the essence.'[^30]

In other words, the Romantics did nothing to *cure* the dualisms of modern life
and thought; instead, they suppressed them and covered them up with a
quasi-religious *feeling* which, beyond its apparent majesty, is nothing more
than a vacuous ambiguity, an 'inflamed inspiration'. Hegel empathises with the
Romantic hostility to disenchantment and dualism. His break from Romanticism is
in his rejection of an *immediate*, anti-intellectual response to these problems
-- no matter how much it makes sense for such a response to come about in the
time of modernity, when 'Spirit has shown itself to be so impoverished that it
seems to yearn for its refreshment only in the meager feeling of divinity.'[^31]

#### Against Formalism {#form}

During much of his career, Hegel was academically overshadowed by his
contemporary F. W. J. Schelling (1775-1854), who was five years younger than him
but nonetheless rose to philosophical prominence more quickly. While Schelling
was also interested in overcoming dualism -- especially that of subject and
object, knower and known -- he took a wildly different approach to the
Romantics. Where writers like Schlegel and Novalis were fragmentary, poetic, and
spiritual, Schelling was unrepentantly systematic and focused predominantly on
*nature*, rather than the religious or spiritual dimensions of life. It was
thought by Schelling that, if we are to understand how subjectivity is a part of
reality in the first place, we must try to understand the natural world from
which subjectivity emerges. In this regard, Schelling's philosophy took the
opposite direction to that of his predecessor, Fichte, for whom subjectivity
('the I', or *das Ich*) was the fundamental fact of philosophy, from which
everything else -- nature included -- had to be derived.

Schelling's influence led to a 'school' of students working under his influence:
philosophers who took Schelling's work as though it was a catalogue of clean-cut
concepts, ready to be applied to any domain of reality. These philosophers are
among those that Hegel criticises in his Preface, accusing them of *formalism*.
(Hegel claimed that he did not intend to criticise Schelling, who was his close
friend, specifically. Nonetheless, Schelling seems to have taken the criticism
personally, and Hegel went on to name Schelling explicitly in his
*Encyclopaedia*.) Formalism, in this context, refers to the moment when
philosophy is turned into a rigid and insular play of language: a 'language
game' in the most disparaging sense. Complicated, incredibly specific concepts
and terminology are devised, which after a point seem to refer to nothing except
themselves. Formalism praises itself for its wide scope and range of
applicability, but amounts to little more than 'the shapeless repetition of one
and the same thing'. Any philosophical truth is lost, 'ensnared in its origin',
insofar as 'its development consists in nothing but the repetition of the same
old formula.'[^32]

> It is all the easier to speak in [a formalist terminology], because if I have
> no sense of personal shame, I can permit myself to utter every possible
> nonsense and triviality when I am talking to people in a language that they do
> not understand.[^33]

Hegel criticises formalism not only for introducing a foreign terminology, but
also for giving no account of its emergence in history, and its relation to the
history before it. How did Schelling, Reinhold, and anyone else arrive at their
conceptual frameworks which are so divorced from everyday language? It is a
mystery, only to be known by the practitioners of these arcane systems. Without
making the historical *development* of one's thinking clear, Hegel claims,
'science has no general intelligibility, and it seems to be the esoteric
possession of only a few individuals.'[^34] To try and understand the origins
and intentions of a formalist system of philosophy is akin to trying to see an
acorn in an oak tree.[^35]

Hegel insists that philosophy must be intelligible to everyone, which is no
surprise when we recall that, for him, philosophy has the anti-elitist concern
of finding the conditions for a good life. Consequently, he believes that
philosophy should be concerned with *everyday* language and concepts. We should
avoid the formalist temptation of devising our own conceptual vocabularies from
scratch. Instead, Hegel predicts that when we correctly comprehend ordinary
concepts, we will find that everyday life contains philosophical, religious, and
spiritual riches hidden away -- *repressed* -- within it, already there. In this
way, he wants to show that conceptual content is already present in the
phenomena of experience; by doing so, he is able to avoid the dualisms of
'phenomena' and 'noumena', 'appearance' and 'thing in itself', etc., that appear
in philosophers like Kant.

Hegel's insistence on comprehending everyday concepts is also a rejection of
formalism's ahistorical nature. Philosophy should not do away with ordinary
concepts (like the formalists do), but nor should it simply take them for
granted; rather, as one commentator puts it,

> Science itself must take us by the hand and lead us from our ordinary concepts
> in their ordinary usage, through all the forgotten and remembered phases, back
> to those same concepts in the philosophical system.[^36]

Far from taking these concepts at face value, Hegel wants to situate them within
the story of their development. Unlike the development of an oak tree, which can
be drawn on a simple timeline between an acorn and the tree itself, human
thought's *logical* development is not *chronological*. At any one time,
multiple philosophical views confront us and compete with one another. How do we
know which view is the most coherent and accurate? Which one is the acorn, the
sapling, or the tree? The philosopher's task, Hegel thinks, is to acquaint
themselves with the ordinary views of the present and all the views of the past,
and comprehend them in their logical development. This is what happens in *The
Phenomenology of Spirit*: it begins (and frequently returns to) views that might
be considered 'common sense', and situates them in a line of development towards
more sophisticated views. The progression in the *Phenomenology* is logical, but
not chronological, since the changes in philosophy throughout history have not
always been moves 'forward'. As Stanley Rosen remarks,

> No competent observer would question the superiority of Galileo's mechanics to
> that of Aristotle. The same cannot be said, however, about the relative merits
> of the ethical and political teachings of Aristotle on the one hand and of
> Machiavelli or Hobbes on the other.[^37]

This developmental, anti-formalist approach to philosophy is why Hegel begins
his work *in medias res*, as mentioned above. The aim of the *Phenomenology* is
to begin amidst our ordinary understanding, and show how knowledge of 'the
Absolute' (a concept which Hegel takes from Schelling and transforms) emerges
from the development of this ordinary thinking. The Absolute, like a repressed
thought, is already there, waiting to be discovered and unveiled.

#### Substance and Subject {#subs}

In Spinoza's system of philosophy, everything begins with a set of definitions.
Basic, fundamental propositions are expanded upon to arrive at a comprehensive
philosophical view. In keeping with his anti-formalist view of philosophy as a
developing *process*, Hegel is highly critical of this approach: 'No
philosophical beginning could look worse than to begin with a definition as
Spinoza does,' he remarks.[^38] Of course, this is in keeping with his avoidance
of the Romantic trend of resting knowledge upon one immediate foundation. In the
*Phenomenology*'s Preface, he explains his criticism:

> It is only as a science or as a *system* that knowing is actual and can be
> given an exposition; and that any further so-called fundamental proposition or
> first principle of philosophy, if it is true, is for this reason alone also
> false just because it is a fundamental proposition or a principle.[^39]

A first principle, like one of Spinoza's definitions, is false *because it is
true*. What does this mean? The answer is in Hegel's emphasis on *development*
and *history* in philosophy, that we have already established. A first principle
or definition, expressed in propositional form, is completely rigid and
unchanging; as such, it resists the development that is required to comprehend
things in their concrete actuality -- that is, in their *development*. To grasp
something in a proposition is to capture its truth only in one moment, only on
one side -- and 'truth' that is only momentary and one-sided is no truth at all.
Static, propositional philosophy 'is incapable of expressing what is concrete
(and what is true is concrete) and speculative', Hegel writes in the
*Encyclopaedia*; 'because of its form, the judgment is one-sided and to that
extent false.'[^40]

In spite of all of this, the Preface contains some aphoristic remarks which
*appear*, at the very least, to be 'first principles' of Hegel's thought. They
have clearly been interpreted in that way by many people, since they have become
some of the most notorious quotations in Hegel's work. The first is as follows:

> According to my insight, which must be justified through the presentation of
> the system itself, everything depends upon comprehending and expressing the
> true not as *substance* but just as much as *subject*.[^41]

Once we understand what this remark means, we will see that it does *not*
contradict Hegel's criticism of aphorisms and first principles. To start with,
the ideas of *substance* and *subject* can be compared.

1. 'Substance' is an ancient concept in philosophy, typically traced back to
   Aristotle, for whom a substance (οὐσία) is that which predicates can apply
   to, and which is not itself a predicate.[^42] In this sense, substance is
   understood to be the 'bottom layer' of concrete reality. The English word
   *substance* comes from Latin *substantia*, literally 'to stand under'.
   Underneath the changes and various appearances in experience stands
   substance, which *persists* through time. According to Spinoza, there is just
   one substance: God -- or nature, which for him is the same thing. This led to
   a huge controversy, with Jacobi famously accusing Spinoza of atheism and
   determinism: if God/nature is the single cause of *everything*, then there is
   surely no room left for individual subjects who cause their own actions.[^43]
2. 'Subject' is less of a clearly-defined concept. It is typically associated
   with thought, perception, and so on: the *subject* is the being who
   perceives and thinks about *objects*, regarding them as separate to them. An
   important contrast to substance is that a subject plays some role in
   constituting itself, *determining* what it is. Hegel believed that 'all
   determinacy is negation', and he attributed this idea to Spinoza (with
   questioning accuracy): '*omnis determinatio est negatio*, as Spinoza
   says.'[^44] Accordingly, subjectivity -- the very fact of being a subject --
   is for Hegel based on the activity of negation. A subject is a being that is
   able to 'step outside of itself': to recognise an Other, be recognised by an
   Other, and to contrast themselves with the Other. So, while substances are
   persistent and self-same, subjects are developmental and determined by what
   they are *not*, just as much by what they *are*.

A philosopher can choose to give particular priority to substance or subject in
their work. Those who choose the former might be classified as *materialists*,
those who choose the latter as *idealists*. Many of the philosophers preceding
Hegel fit into one of these groups: Walter Kaufmann suggests Spinoza and Fichte
as representatives of materialism and idealism and J. B. Baillie adds Kant and
Schelling to the idealist side.[^45] Hegel sees both sides as unsatisfactory:
for materialism, it seems that 'self-consciousness only perishes and is not
preserved': as in Jacobi's criticism of Spinoza, to reduce everything to
substance precludes the possibility of free subjects. Moreover, it seems
impossible to entirely rule out the existence of ideal things: since 'matter'
cannot be perceived with the senses, and is a universal derived from various
different things, is it not itself an idea?[^46]

Even the idealists, who put the subject and its thought at the root of all
things, are in a difficult situation regarding freedom. An idealist can go the
route of Leibniz, who endows our knowledge with certainty by suggesting that the
mind has a pre-established harmony with the unchanging, self-sufficient nature
of God, but in doing so makes everything determined and completely undermines
freedom. Alternatively, one can go the route of Kant and Fichte, who maintain
a belief in subjective freedom, but only via an act of *faith* (in Kant) or an
'intellectual intuition' (in Fichte): for neither philosopher is freedom
established as a *fact* of subjectivity.

Materialism-idealism is thus another dualism that Hegel wants to overcome, and
to understand 'the true not as *substance* but just as much as *subject*' is his
attempt at doing this. By attributing subjectivity to substance, Hegel is
claiming that *negativity*, which has been established as central to
subjectivity, *is also central to substance itself*. That is to say, substantial
reality itself involves self-othering, involves its own negation, and is
inherently a *development* and a process: 'the true is not an *original unity*
as such ... it is the coming-to-be of itself'.[^47] As such, 'substance is
subject' is permissible as a 'first principle' precisely because it is an
*anti*-principle; to equate substance (what *is*) with subject (what is
*becoming*, in and through what it is *not*) is to avoid the rigidity of
propositional first principles. To understand exactly *how* substance is subject
can never be done in a proposition; it 'must be justified through the
presentation of the system', as Hegel writes. The *Phenomenology* will thus show
the inherence of negativity within reality, the process through which things
*become*.

This reading can be pushed even further, however. Not only does 'substance as
subject' imply that substantial reality is developmental and processive, but
that it is also *permanently incomplete*, just as the subject is. The
*Phenomenology* will show that the self-conscious subject never reaches complete
satisfaction in its self-awareness. The threat of the Other is always there, the
subject can always be undermined, and so on, and it is the *very nature* of
subjectivity to live with this inconsistency.[^48] As such, to recognise
'substance as subject' is to recognise the impossibility for substance to be
stable and identical with itself. As Slavoj Žižek explains, this is the most
direct way that Hegel distances himself from the subject-focused idealists like
Fichte: 'the subject does not come first, it is not a new name for the One which
grounds all, but the name for the inner impossibility or self-blockage of the
One.'[^49]

For this reason, there is no 'clean beginning' to philosophy, like Spinoza's
definitions, Fichte's self-positing I, or Jacobi's *salto mortale*. The drive to
begin one's philosophy with a certainty free of error *is itself* an error,
because 'error' and 'falsehood', typically regarded as exclusive to the domain
of subjectivity, are built into the *substance* of reality itself.[^50] As Žižek
goes on to say:

> At its most elementary, the Real [i.e. substantial reality, the Absolute] is
> non-identity itself: the impossibility for X to be(come) "fully itself." The
> Real is not the external intruder or obstacle preventing the realization of
> X's identity with itself, but the absolutely immanent impossibility of this
> identity. It is not that X cannot fully realize itself as X because an
> external obstacle hinders it -- the impossibility comes first, and the
> external obstacle ultimately just materializes this impossibility. As such,
> the Real is opaque, inaccessible, out of reach, *and* undeniable, impossible
> to by-pass or remove -- in it, lack and surplus coincide.[^51]

Of course, as Hegel has himself pointed out, the real insight of this idea must
be justified and demonstrated through the presentation of his whole system. The
idea of a universe that is *at its heart* incomplete is one that will
(hopefully) become more plausible to us as the *Phenomenology* progresses.

#### Dialectical Thinking {#dial}

<blockquote class="short epigraph">
Do I contradict myself?<br>
Very well then I contradict myself,<br>
(I am large, I contain multitudes.)
<footer>Walt Whitman, <em>Song of Myself</em>, 1855</footer></blockquote>

At this point, we are left with the question: how is the development of the
*Phenomenology* -- the 'voyage of discovery', as Hegel called it -- supposed to
progress? What makes it move? Deep into his long Preface, Hegel finally gives us
some answers, by distinguishing ordinary 'argumentative thinking'
[*Räsonnement*] with his own 'conceptual thinking' [*begreifende Denken*].[^52]
The conceptual thinker, he claims, submerges their thought 'into the immanent
rhythm of the concept.'[^53] This is Hegel's rather opaque way of saying that
conceptual thought, rather than trying to *represent* its object and to develop
this representation when it sees fit, instead recognises its object as
containing development *within it*, and gives itself over to this development.
In other words, conceptual thought is the kind of thinking that comprehends
substance as subject.

Hegel clarifies what he means by further distinguishing conceptual thinking from
argumentative thinking. Typically, he claims, argumentative thinking is 'merely
*negative*'.[^54] It tells us what is false, but doesn't tell us how to get
towards the truth. In this regard, the argumentative thinker is akin to the
person in a childish argument who, when presented with an idea, simply says
'no!' and offers no correction or alternative. This is an empty negation which
is simply imposed on the content of discussion by the thinker: when presented
with any thoughtful idea, argumentative thinking only 'knows how to refute it
and reduce it to nothing.' In conceptual thinking, on the other hand, negativity
is not imposed by the thinker but, instead, 'the negative belongs to the content
itself.' This allows for what Hegel calls a *determinate negation*.

Determinate negativity is not arbitrarily applied by a thinker; rather, it
belongs to a thing (or a situation, or whatever else) and plays a *positive*
role in determining what that thing is. It is a negation 'with a positive
content', as Hegel puts it.[^55] As an example of this, consider two atheists.
One was raised as a Muslim, and came to reject their theistic upbringing; the
other was raised in a Catholic setting, which they also came to reject. While
both of these people are atheists, their atheism is different because of what it
rejects (what it *negates*): to be a 'non-Muslim atheist' involves a different
set of (non-)beliefs to being a 'non-Catholic atheist'. The negative 'non-' in
the identities of the two individuals plays a *positive* role in defining who
they are. Another example of determinate negativity is given by Alenka Zupančič,
based on a joke from Ernst Lubitsch's film *Ninotchka*:

> A guy goes into a restaurant and says to the waiter: "Coffee without cream,
> please." The waiter replies: "I'm sorry, sir, but we're out of cream. Could it
> be without milk?" The waiter's response introduces an additional, paradoxical
> spectral entity in the very dimension of negativity. The presupposition of his
> response is that "without" something actually means "with the lack of
> something," or with-without something.[^56]

For conceptual thinking to be able to grasp determinate negation is of great
importance since, as noted above, *all* determination for Hegel -- that is, all
particularities and qualities of an object -- is made possible through
negativity.[^57] For this reason, only conceptual thinking can carry actual,
positive content; and it does so by negativity and development in the very thing
it is thinking about. The negativity that conceptual thinking acknowledges in
reality is central to what we established above as the *subjectivity* of
substantial reality. All this is what makes Hegel's work **dialectical**.

Despite what many misconceptions and misrepresentations would have us believe,
'dialectics' is not a readymade method which can be applied universally to any
problem of philosophy. The idea of a 'thesis' being followed by an 'antithesis',
and the two being followed by a greater 'synthesis', is wildly inaccurate and to
be found nowhere in Hegel's writing. Rather, philosophical thinking is
dialectical when it refuses to trail behind its objects, desperately shuffling
propositions and concepts in an attempt to grasp a reality that is constantly
changing. A non-dialectical, argumentative thinker will throw away their
'concepts' as soon as the contradictions of reality challenge them. In
dialectical philosophy, on the other hand, we are concerned with '*the* concept'
[*der Begriff*] as such: the constantly moving account we keep of reality *as a
whole*.[^58] The concept is not supposed to 'match' reality or 'signify' it, as
someone like William of Ockham would have us believe; rather, the concept *is*
reality, in the same way that Plato's 'ideas' or Aristotle's 'essences' are.
'The "nature" of a thing is something thought, but it also is something
operative in the thing,' Richard Kroner writes.[^59]

As such, when dialectical philosophy encounters contradictions in experience, it
takes these moments as *determinate negations*. Contradiction is not a failure
for Hegel; rather, it is a sign of success. A contradiction in the concept's
development allows the concept to account for something previously unaccounted
for. This is precisely the way in which the *Phenomenology* progresses: Hegel
(or the narrator, or the protagonist, for this is a 'voyage', after all)
expresses his concept -- a claim to grasp reality with absolute certainty -- and
elaborates upon it until a contradiction is found. It is at these moments of
contradiction that the concept *embraces* the negativity it was repressing, and
reaches a more holistic stage. In the rest of this commentary, I hope to
demonstrate how this holism evolves from the simple naivety of sense-perception
into the sophistications of drama and politics.

Today's intellectual atmosphere is skeptical of any grand accounts of 'The
Truth'. It is more comfortable to concern ourselves with tiny, trivial problems
that remain safe among the few people who speak the right academic language. A
world in which philosophers have something substantial to say about how we live,
and how we should live, seems almost ancient. But *The Phenomenology of Spirit*
isn't yet old enough to be forgotten, and Hegel, despite living in an atmosphere
comparable to ours, had the courage to be ambitious. It is left to the reader to
decide whether or not he was successful.
