## Self-Consciousness

<blockquote class="epigraph">A human being is spirit. But what is spirit? Spirit is the self. But what is the self? The self is a relation that relates itself to itself or is the relation’s relating itself to itself in the relation. <footer>Søren Kierkegaard, *The Sickness Unto Death*</footer></blockquote>

### Desire

The *Phenomenology*'s chapter on self-consciousness marks a turning point in the
book; in some sense, everything that follows is an examination of
self-consciousness. At the opening of the chapter, Hegel remarks that 'in the
preceding kinds of certainty, the truth for consciousness is *something other
than consciousness itself*'.[^1] Sensuous certainty gave way to perception,
which gave way to the understanding, and these overcomings occurred because 'the
concept of the truth vanishes in the experience of it'.[^2] That is to say, each
stage of knowing posits a particular concept (whether that is the This, the One,
or force) as *absolute*, certain truth. As experience undermined the truth of
these concepts, eventually consciousness came to recognise *itself* as the
movement of concepts. Thus, for the first time, consciousness is its own object.
Just as before, consciousness is making a claim to absolute truth; this time, it
asserts consciousness itself as absolute truth. The claim of self-consciousness,
to start with, is therefore: *'That which cannot be doubted is that I am
myself.'*

This is likely to remind us of Descartes' *cogito*. But it is even more
reminiscent of Kant's idealism, which Hyppolite summarises in the formula:
'Self-consciousness is the truth of consciousness'.[^3] For Kant, the only way
we can possibly ascertain knowledge is if the conditions of the object are equal
to the conditions of the subject; in other words, the structure of the world
must match the structure of consciousness. Thus, knowledge of the world is also
knowledge of the self. As Hegel himself remarked, at the end of the previous
chapter, 'there is so much self-satisfaction in explanation, because the
consciousness involved in it is, to put it this way, in an immediate
conversation with itself, enjoying only itself'.[^4] So, in 'enjoying itself',
self-consciousness imposes itself on the whole world around it. That *I am
myself* is, for self-consciousness, the highest level of truth.
