### Mastery and Servitude {#master}
#### Self-Sufficiency and Non-Self-Sufficiency of Self-Consciousness {.subtitle}

The present section is possibly the most-read passage in all of Hegel's work,
though it lasts less than ten pages. At the opening, Hegel explains that
self-consciousness is only '*in* and *for itself*' -- that is, it is only fully
manifest in its complete logical form -- when it is 'a *recognized* being'.[^20]
Hegel's sense of recognition relies upon a typically Hegelian contradiction: it
is the process by which spiritual *unity* emerges out of a *doubling*. As I
understand it, this logic of recognition bears a similarity to the logic of
force in the previous chapter. Recall that, in asserting itself, force reaches
outside of itself and presses up against an external force. In Hyppolite's
words, force is 'the unity of itself and its externalization'.[^21] In the same
way, 'self-consciousness is *outside of itself*'.[^22] Just as a force is
manifest only insofar as it comes into contact with another force, so too does
self-consciousness only exist insofar as it is *recognised to exist* by an
Other. The process of 'reaching out' and being recognised is like a reflection:
first, self-consciousness 'loses itself' in the Other, recognising them; second,
it *sublates* the Other, and recognises them recognising it. Think of somebody
looking into a mirror: they first recognise the image, and then they recognise
that the image is an image of themselves. In both the Hegelian process of
recognition, and the process of looking into a mirror, the self-consciousness
returns into itself by negating the otherness (either the Other or the
mirror-image). 'It gets itself back through sublation, for it comes to be in
equality with itself again through the sublation of *its* otherness'.[^23]
