### Stoicism and Skepticism
#### Freedom of Self-Consciousness, Part One {.subtitle}

#### Stoicism {#stoic}

Here is where the last chapter has left us: the master has imposed the demands
of their desire onto the slave, and has thus become a repetitive consumer. The
master is never satisfied, because they continue to destroy (i.e., consume) the
objects of their desire, and they are also are not free, because they rely so
constantly on the work of the slave. Freedom requires intelligent
self-sufficiency, Hegel claims, just as Spinoza had recognised in the *Ethics*:

> That thing is said to be free [*liber*] which exists solely from the necessity
> of its own nature, and is determined to action by itself alone.[^53]

The slave, on the other hand, has moved towards freedom by expressing their
subjectivity through work, imposing their identity on an object and thereby
'solidifying' it. Nonetheless, the slave is not yet entirely free, because they
still depend somewhat upon the object. Because the slave's work was demanded by
the master, the slave still sees the master as the essential being -- that is,
the subject -- in the situation. The slave hasn't yet understood what we, the
phenomenological observers, realise: that the crafted object's very *form* is
bestowed upon it by the slave, and that the slave is therefore the substance of
the object. As Kalkavage puts it, we recognise that 'the substance of things is
their relation to the thinking subject or consciousness'.[^54]

What kind of self-consciousness *can* realise this? What kind of character is
able to recognise that they are self-sufficient and autonomous, with no need to
refer to a master, a Beyond, or a mundane thing? And what kind of activity would
this character be involved in? Hegel's answer is: the **stoic** and **thought
itself**.

While the slave was tied to the object, and found independence only through
recognising themselves in the object, the stoic's thinking is concerned with
*concepts* instead of objects. This, after all, is what thinking really is;
while the slave and the master obviously had *thoughts*, they had them only in a
limited and dependent sense. As Harris describes them, 'Being human, they both
think, but they think finitely, and in *Vorstellungen* [representations]. Their
thoughts have external referents, and are not the comprehensive grasping of
completely intellectual contents (the Under­ standing's concept of Force was the
first "pure thought" that we had to deal with)'.[^55] That is to say, free
thought -- which is precisely what the stoic practices -- operates not
'according to representations or shapes but rather in *concepts*, which is to
say, the object moves itself within a differentiated being-in-itself, which for
consciousness is not anything immediately differentiated from it'.[^56] Because
a concept is *purely* mental, and makes no attempt to represent objects separate
from consciousness, it is always *my own*. Miller's translation has a useful
phrase with which to contrast the stoic's thinking: it never manifests as
'picture-thought'. This kind of thinking is free precisely because it is
self-sufficient, and relies merely on the self alone. It might seem, therefore,
like a precursor to Descartes' self-reliant *cogito*. In thinking, consciousness
is 'an object to itself'; 'its meaning is that of the *being-for-itself* of that
consciousness [who thinks]'.[^57] As the object of free thought, the concept is
a *thing* of sorts (a 'determinate and distinguished existent', in Hegel's
words), but it is never a *represented* thing; it is never something other than
consciousness.

> In that this content [of the stoic's thought] is at the same time a
> conceptually grasped content, consciousness remains *immediately* self-aware
> of its unity with this determinate and distinguished existent, not as it would
> be in the case of representation, in which consciousness especially has to
> remind itself that this is *its* representation; rather, the concept is to me
> immediately *my* concept.[^58]

Hegel summarises the stoic's freedom when he says that 'within thinking, I am
*free* because I am not in an other ... my moving about in concepts is a
movement within myself'.[^59] As such, the stoic is neither a naive master, who
finds their truth in the slave, nor a slave, whose truth is found in serving the
master. Hegel is perhaps thinking of how the two masters of stoicism (Marcus
Aurelius and Epictetus) were an emperor and a slave, respectively, when he says
that stoicism 'consists in being free within all the dependencies of one's
singular existence, *whether on the throne or in fetters*'. The stoic
*withdraws* from 'actual doing', from 'suffering', and from life itself, 'and
*withdraws* into *the simple essentiality of thought*'.[^60]

As has happened before in the *Phenomenology*, the language we use to describe
our grasp on truth has overtaken us; the very words used in describing
stoicism's *strength* give a voice to its *weaknesses*. To be specific, stoicism
has prided itself on its *withdrawal* from life into the *immediacy* of
self-consciousness's own concepts, but by doing this, it has '*let go of natural
existence*' and cast itself into a state of purely internal reflection.[^61] The
comparison with Descartes can thus continue in a critical direction: it seems
that the stoic has ended up trapped as the famous 'ghost in the machine'.[^62]
To be sure, the stoic is an adept thinker, but in stoicism, Hegel writes,
'thought only has *pure thoguhts* as its truth, a truth without any fulfillment
in life'; as such, the 'freedom' that the stoic held onto so proudly is 'not
living freedom itself but only the concept of freedom'.[^63] What good is
freedom if it isn't exercised against the grip of life and its suffering? There
is no real *content* to a stoic's thinking -- only concepts reflected in other
concepts. Furthermore, this empty and formalistic thinking even falls into
contradiction when it is asked for the criterion of truth:

> To the question put to it, "*What* is good and true?", its answer was once
> more that it was the abstract thinking *devoid of all content itself*, namely,
> that the true and the good is supposed to consist in rationality. However,
> this self-equality of thinking is only again the pure form in which nothing is
> determinate.

That is to say, there can be no real truth in thought that has no content. There
is nothing against which the stoic's thinking can be tested; as such, all
high-minded reference the stoic makes to 'truth', 'the good', and so on,
eventually dissolves.

> The general terms, "true" and "good", or "wisdom" and "virtue", with which
> stoicism is stuck, are on the whole undeniably uplifting, but because they
> cannot in fact end up in any kind of expansion of content, they quickly start
> to become tiresome.[^64]

#### Skepticism {#skept}

Where is self-consciousness to go after its claim to truth has lost all content?
It might seem intuitive to revoke the logic of stoicism, with the hope of
finding some content in the external world that the stoic had shrunk away from.
The *dialectical* approach, however, is to persevere; to take the logic of
stoicism to its utmost conclusion, and embrace its negativity (namely, the loss
of truth-content).

Skepticism *realises* that which for stoicism was only a potentiality.
Precisely, 'it is the actual experience of what freedom of thought is'.[^65]
Stoicism was only an 'incomplete negation' of otherness, while 'skepticism is
*in itself* the negative'.[^66] What does this mean? Think of how the
*Phenomenology* shows that experience always undermines conceptualisation: as
Harris puts it, '"Realizing" [a] concept produces a result that is the opposite
of what is projected in the conceptual blueprint'.[^67] The same applies to
skepticism's realisation of stoicism's concept. Skepticism *accepts* the stoic
insistence on mental reflection, but claims that this insistence, if it is taken
seriously, must imply a complete *refusal* to claim any certain knowledge,
because *the mental world has no necessary connection with the external world*,
wherein the criterion for truth lies. That is, skepticism reveals that stoicism
lacks a mediation between what appears and what is thought -- between the
manifest and the scientific. (In *Consciousness*, the positing of supersensible
force was such a mediation.) Stoicism *posits the concept* of self-sufficient
consciousness; skepticism realises the corresponding *experience*, which is that
of the *annihilation of the world*.

The skepticism Hegel has in mind has more in common with ancient Pyrrhonism than
with the work of Hume or Schulze. While the modern skeptics have primarily
epistemological concerns, ancient skepticism was directly aimed at the good
life, by means of achieving *ataraxia* -- a state of mental quietude or
undisturbedness. As Sextus Empiricus writes, 'Scepticism is an ability, or
mental attitude, which opposes appearances to judgements in any way
whatsoever'.[^68] As such, while stoicism's shrinking away from the world was an
unintended side-effect of its theory of the world -- namely, the theory that
*the self is at the centre* -- skepticism *embraces* a kind of worldlessness. It
is 'the rejection of all theories about the world, since the world, if there is
one, is unknowable and there is nothing intelligible to say about it', as Robert
Solomon puts it.[^69] Hegel himself says, in his Lectures on the History of
Philosophy, that 'the general aim of Skepticism is that, with the vanishing of
all [finite] being, of everything determinate, everything affirmative,
self-consciousness should attain within itself this inner stability, a perfect
<span lang="el">ἀταραξία</span>, ataraxia'.[^70]

The significance of this distinction -- between ancient Pyyrhonic skepticism and
modern Humean skepticism -- is that only the ancient skeptics were invested in a
project that wasn't merely *epistemological*, but *practical*; a project
concerning self-consciousness itself. As Hegel writes in an early essay of 1802,
'[early] skepticism ... did not give itself out for a decided option [haeresis]
or school, but rather ... for an *agōgē*, an education for a way of life, a
formative process'.[^71] That is to say, the skeptic's 'annihilation' of the
world is not for the sake of proving an epistemological point; rather, as
Kalkavage explains, 'His spree of bubble bursting is the act in which he asserts
himself and his thinking as master of the world'.[^72] Just like the stoic, the
skeptic wants to liberate the individual; this is where skepticism finds its
absolute truth. The uniquely *skeptical* way of liberating the individual is to
negate all otherness; that is, to deny all worldly certainty.

Hegel's analysis of skepticism is made clearer when he makes an interesting
reference back to the dialectic of the master and slave:

> It is clear that just as stoicism corresponds to the *concept* of
> *self-sufficient* consciousness (which appeared as a relationship between
> mastery and servitude), skepticism corresponds to the *realization* of the
> concept of self-sufficient consciousness as the negative direction (of desire
> and work) towards otherness.[^73]

There are two points being made in this sentence. The first is one that has
already been explored, namely that 'skepticism corresponds to the *realization*'
of stoicism's concept. The second point is more complex: Hegel is explaining
that the movement of stoicism to skepticism is, in essence, a repetition of the
master-slave dialectic. The relation of mastery and servitude arose as a
two-sided attempt to posit self-sufficiency, and in its experience -- that is,
through its *enactment* -- it resulted in the negation of otherness (through
*desire*, on the side of the master, and *work*, on the side of the slave). In
the same way, the movement from stoicism to skepticism demonstrated the
transformation of a conceptual positing of self-sufficient consciousness into
the concrete experience of the 'annihilation' of the world. The difference now
is that the 'work' of skepticism is able to go further than the master's desire
or the slave's work:

> However much desire and work were not able to achieve the negation for
> self-consciousness, by contrast this polemical direction towards the manifold
> self-sufficiency of things meets with success because, within itself, as an
> already culminated and free self-consciousness, it turns against them.[^74]

Desire was unsuccessful, as we saw, because it always had to renew its object.
The slave's labour was unsuccessful because it 'produced an independent object
that embodied the worker-slave's chain to his master'.[^75] The skeptic,
however, is in a different position. The skeptic has a grasp on 'the infinity of
thought'.[^76] Infinity, [as explained above](consciousness.html#infin), is the
containment of opposites within the same object. The pointing out of these
internal oppositions is precisely the activity of the skeptic: Sextus, for
example, can point out that something appears one way, and also a contradicting
way, to the same person. The skeptic's *work* is thus better equipped than that
of the slave, because thinking the Hegelian infinite allows for the skeptic to
realise the negation of *everything* (in thought, at least) at once. The slave,
on the other hand, had to toil over each individual object, only to find at the
end of the labour a sign of their subjugation staring back at them.

> The skeptical self negates the world, annihilates all established differences,
> and in this negation experiences nothing but itself. This is the negativity
> and otherness that define self-consciousness.[^77]

Skepticism progresses by negating, and in this way it is the first *consciously
dialectical* thinker to appear in the *Phenomenology*. To be sure, the master,
slave, and stoic all underwent dialectical development, as did the subjects of
sensuous certainty, perception, and the understanding. But in skepticism,
dialectics 'is a moment of self-consciousness, to which it does not simply
*happen* that the true and the real for it vanishes without its knowing how this
comes about'.[^78] That is to say, the real now vanishes because the skeptic
*consciously lets* it vanish; dialectical overturning is no longer an unconscious
side-effect of claiming absolute truth.

#### Disarray, Vertigo and Disorder {#disord}

By naming the skeptic the first truly dialectical thinker, Hegel clearly holds
skepticism in high regard. Naturally, however, he also finds contradiction
within it. Indeed, the skeptic ends up in a state of real disorder. A skeptic is
only self-sufficient and comfortable within the world insofar as they are
*constantly* undermining the world, and they can only do this insofar as they
formally negate everything that is given to them. Hegel puts this nicely when he
says that the skeptic's 'talk is indeed like that of a squabble among stubborn
children, one of whom says A when the other says B, and then says B when the
other says A'.[^79] For as long as a skeptic wants to be free, they have no
choice but to engage in this endless 'squabble', to act as a stubborn contrarian
who has no fixed principles of their own. The result of this is that skeptical
self-consciousness becomes 'an utterly contingent disarray, the vertigo of a
perpetually self-creating disorder'.[^80] What is most damaging is that the
skeptic's nay-saying applies even to their own identity: in order to maintain
the spirit of skepticism, the skeptic must concede that they are a singular,
contingent being, a '*forsaken*' part of 'animal life', prone to the delusions
of the senses and thus incapable of confident judgment. And yet, at the same
time, the whole point of the skeptical mindset is to posit oneself as the master
of the world, rationally detached (like the stoic) from contingent things, in
ataraxic indifference! 'This consciousness', Hegel writes, 'is thus the
insensible claptrap that goes to and fro from the one extreme of self-equal
self-consciousness to the other extreme of contingent, disordered, and
disordering consciousness'.[^81]

In addition to this, the practice of skepticism inevitably results in a
performative contradiction. The skeptic calls things into question by opposing
the various appearances of those things, but doing so is only possible if the
givenness of those appearances is *not* called into question. As Hegel points
out, skepticism 'speaks about absolute *disappearance*, but that "*speaking
about*" itself *is* ... It speaks about the nullity of seeing, hearing, and so
on, and it *itself* sees, *hears*, and so on'.[^82]

Through experience, therefore, skepticism eventually realises that the skeptic
is a self-contradictory self-consciousness. There is a *doubling* of
consciousness in skepticism. This doubling 'was previously distributed between
two singular individuals, the master and the servant', Hegel points out; now,
skepticism has brought it into one singular being.[^83] In order to reconcile
itself to this contradiction, consciousness must form itself into a new shape,
one which is *self-aware* about its doubled nature. The name of this new shape
is **unhappy consciousness**.
