## Reason {#begin}

### Introduction

There is a dramatic change between the eclipse of unhappy consciousness and the
dawn of reason. The unhappy subject, who goes again and again on a pilgrimage to
the church in order to witness God through a medium, is still ultimately
unhappy: for God's salvation comes only in the heavenly kingdom, when all that
is singular and contingent is finally shrugged off. For the unhappy subject,
there is no community until we die.

Now, however, unhappy consciousness is no longer at the forefront of things. In
Hegel's enormous chapter on *Reason* (consisting of over two-hundred
paragraphs), the foundations for positivity and a real community, prior to
heaven, are established. The key to the success of reason is *mediation*, which
emerged in self-consciousness in the figure of the 'mediating counsel' or
priest. Now, we (the phenomenological observers) must recognise that what
appeared in self-consciousness as three distinct entities -- the unhappy
subject, the unchangeable God, and the mediating priest -- are finally
understood as three moments of one unified position: namely, the *syllogism* of
reason. What first appeared as the priest's mediation between God and the
unhappy worshipper is now recognised as *reason's* mediation between the
unchangeable universal and the singular individual. Reason's power to mediate is
the first appearance of philosophical thought proper, 'the unity that
immediately knows both of the other terms, relates both of them to each other,
and is the consciousness of their unity'.[^1]

Being the site of mediation between the universal and particular, reason begins
with the pompous certainty of 'being all truth'. The mediating ego or *I* is
thus at the centre of the whole world: we are now in the era of **idealism**.
For as long as the self has been conscious of itself -- from its earliest desire
to the apex of unhappy consciousness -- it has had a negative relationship
towards the world. 'Formerly', Hegel says of the subject, 'it did not understand
the world; it desired it and worked on it, withdrew itself from it, took an
inward turn back into itself away from it, and erased the world for itself and
itself as consciousness'.[^2] It is only now, with reason's power of mediation,
that self and world -- thinking and being -- are united, one and the same. It is
at this point that we can declare Parmenides' saying: <span lang="el">τὸ γὰρ
αὐτὸ νοεῖν ἐστίν τε καὶ εἶναι</span> [*being and thinking are one and the
same*].[^3]

#### First Criticism of Idealism: the Journey of the World-Spirit {#journ}

In his commentary on the *Phenomenology*, J. N. Findlay gives a clear summary of
the starting position of reason:

> Consciousness in the experience of absolution has risen to the realization
> that the individual consciousness is implicitly one with the Absolute Essence
> which is, however, still placed essentially beyond itself. In this realization
> self-consciousness has been projected into the world of objects, into the
> realm of being, and it has also identified itself with the universal. It has
> become the middle term in a syllogism which reconciles the individual with the
> unchangeable universal, and which thereby sees itself as all truth.[^4]

In what particular way does reason 'see itself as all truth'? Recall that every
shape of knowing in the *Phenomenology* so far begins with *certainty*: an
immediate and often naive claim to truth. The chapter on reason begins in just
the same way: Hegel makes a distinction between an idealism that recognises the
journey (from sensuous certainty to self-consciousness) that is necessary for
'*proving*' that the I is all truth and all reality, and the idealism for whom
this journey is forgotten. In its present moment of certainty, reason fits the
latter description. 'It only gives *the assurance* of being all reality, but
does not itself comprehend this, for the comprehension of this immediately
expressed assertion is that forgotten path itself'.[^5] This kind of naive,
asserted idealism is thus only 'an *immediate certainty* against which other
immediate certainties stand in contrast': since the naive idealist has forgotten
the dialectical overcoming of the certainties in consciousness and
self-consciousness (sensuous certainty and the desiring I, respectively), it is
unable to overcome these certainties, or prove itself against them.[^6] This point
may be specifically directed at J. G. Fichte's idealism. In the introduction to
his idealist system, Fichte claims that 'to begin with, idealism is unable to
refute dogmatism', and that 'the dogmatist is equally incapable of refuting the
idealist'.[^7] For Hegel, Fichte is forced to see idealism and dogmatism as
incapable of refuting one another because he has ignored the dialectical path
that makes idealism *possible*.

There is a sense here in which Fichte is actually less sophisticated than his
predecessor, Kant. As Dieter Henrich put it, Kant's critical project relied on
the fact that 'before there can be an insight that there is some illusion in
this metaphysics, there has first to be an original metaphysics. ... Because, in
his view, one cannot get to the truth all at once at the beginning, there are
necessary stages of the development of philosophy'.[^8] This is far closer to
Hegel's realisation of the historicity of philosophy. Nonetheless, Hegel also
had criticisms of Kant, of course, and Fichte's work certainly wasn't the first
great example of 'forgetting' in the history of philosophy: as Harris notes,
Fichte is really carrying out a 'repetition of Spinoza and Leibniz' in his
insistence on immediacy.[^9]

The critical element in the first four paragraphs on 'the certainty and truth'
of reason are summarised by Hegel quite simply: 'How consciousness is
*immediately* to be found ... depends on what it has already *come to be*.'[^10]

#### Second Criticism of Idealism: On the Arbitrariness of the Categories {#categ}

So far, the idealist whose development we are witnessing is comfortable in the
certainty that all reality is conditioned by the I. Expressed more directly:
'Reason is the certainty of being all *reality*.'[^11] The I thus becomes a
**category**: it is the light that illuminates every thing. This idea appears
perhaps most clearly in Kant, when he explains that 'the *I think* must be able to
accompany all my representations': the 'I think' (which is both a thought and an
*act* of self-awareness), unifying all objects, is the fundamental category
which conditions all of reality.[^12] As Hegel puts it, this category is thus
'the *simple* unity of self-consciousness and being'.

The idea of 'categories' as thought's classifications of beings appears as early
as in Aristotle. Aristotle, however, was no idealist. When Hegel refers in §235
to 'a one-sided, bad idealism' in which there is a *remainder* of what is
categorised -- namely, the *in-itself* 'confronting' self-consciousness -- he
has Kant in mind. In Kant's first *Critique*, he took Aristotle's term and
revised it to refer to the 'pure concepts' which, according to him, necessarily
govern the way that objects can be understood:

> In such a way there arise exactly as many pure concepts of the understanding,
> which apply to objects of intuition in general *a priori*, as there were
> logical functions of all possible judgments in the previous table: for the
> understanding is completely exhausted and its capacity entirely measured by
> these functions. Following Aristotle we will call these concepts
> **categories**, for our aim is basically identical with his al­ though very
> distant from it in execution.[^13]

The idealist we have seen so far has only one category: namely, the I itself.
This is not closely correspondent with any hugely famous moment in the history
of philosophy. With Kant, however, we come to a 'second idealism', which is
nonetheless 'even more incomprehensible than the first'.[^14] Kant's argument
(the conclusion of which is in the quotation above) is that there is a
*plurality* of categories (specifically, twelve), and that this plurality is
grounded on the plurality of human thought's functions of judgment. For
instance, affirmative and negative judgments correspond to the categories of
reality and negation, and so on.

Hegel seems to accept that, from the single category of the I, a plurality of
categories must emerge. His argument for this claim is obscure; he explains that
'this category [the I], or the *simple* unity of self-consciousness and being,
has the *difference* in itself, for its essence is just this, that it is
immediately self-equal in *otherness*, or immediately self-equal in the absolute
difference'.[^15] This seems to be an instance of the argumentative gesture that
appears again and again in the *Phenomenology*: namely, that determinateness
(of a category, in this instance) is possible only through its *difference* with
an opposite. Thus, as soon as any category of reality is affirmed, its opposite
must also be affirmed as a category; consequently, a plurality of categories
arises.

Indeed, Kant's table of categories is populated by oppositions (unity-plurality,
necessity-contingency, and so on); however, he does not arrive at plurality via
the argument I have just given. His multiple categories are simply derived from
the multiple functions of judgment, as described above. Many people have made
the criticism that this makes Kant's so-called 'deduction' of the categories
rather arbitrary, if they are grounded ultimately on what is *assumed* to be an
exhaustive catalogue of human thinking. Hegel, however, takes this criticism a
little further, in a concluding sentence that sounds almost exasperated or
frustrated:

> ... to take up again the plurality of categories in some way or other as
> something we simply come upon, for example, in judgments, and then to continue
> to put up with them in that form, is in fact to be regarded as a disgrace to
> science. Where is the understanding supposed to be capable of demonstrating
> necessity if it is incapable of demonstrating the pure necessity it has within
> itself?[^16]

Essentially, Kant is satisfied to 'simply come upon' the categories via the
functions of judgment. Hegel's criticism does not target the basis Kant opts for
(that is, *judgment*), but instead targets the *very gesture* of 'simply coming
upon' the categories. If this criticism is a little opaque in the
*Phenomenology*, it is clearer in Hegel's *Encyclopaedia*, where he praises
Fichte for having 'reminded us that the *thought-determinations* [categories]
must be exhibited in their necessity, and that it is essential for them to be
*deduced*.'[^17] The *Science of Logic*, which was published in full in 1816,
is Hegel's attempt to overcome the 'outrage of science' in Kant, and outline a
system of logic that is fully and legitimately grounded, and takes nothing as
given. As for now, we continue with the *Phenomenology*'s task of *overcoming*
the philosophical standpoint from which a 'given' is acceptable.
