## Spirit

### The Enlightenment

<blockquote class="epigraph">Philosophy, so as to benefit humankind, must raise up and support fallen and weak man, not uproot nature or abandon him in his corruption.<footer>Giambattista Vico, *The New Science*, 1725</footer></blockquote>

Hegel's account of the Enlightenment represents the third part of his analysis
of pure insight. In the previous section, insight was looked at in itself---as a
self-reflection without content---and in its relation actuality---as the drive
to conceptualisation. This third step, which regards insight in its relationship
(its 'struggle') with faith, emerges out of the last section's final
realisation: that insight has a will to universality, to establish a unified
conceptualisation of the entire world under the rational eye of the self.

Since pure insight is a process, the Enlightenment is a journey: the
'dissemination' of insight, as we are told at the opening of the chapter on
Spirit.[^1] As with all journeys in the *Phenomenology*, when the subject has
traversed their intended path of action they will find themselves transformed on
the basis of this traversal: Enlightenment's attitude towards faith is a kind of
paternalistic ethic, and just as the book's previous paternalist (the law of the
heart) realised about itself, Enlightenment is unwittingly entangled in that
which it intends to criticise.

Where Culture was captured in the disorganised back-and-forth between Rameau's
newphew and the *philosophe*, Enlightenment emerges---as all signs of
development do in Hegel---as a third term. But where in Diderot's book does a
third term appear? The dialogue, from beginning to end, is between only two
characters. And yet all of this 'claptrap' will have been forgotten, Hegel
points out, if it were not gathered up into a whole by a 'third consciousness';
in other words, if the speech (the 'scattered language') of the dialogue had not
been collected in the universality of writing; in other words again, *if Diderot
had not written it*.[^2] Over and above young Rameau and his friend, it is
Diderot himself who is enlightened insofar as he is able to mediate the
conversation he records and thereby render a general insight from it. It is
presuambly for the same reasons that we attribute the ideas in the *Republic* to
Plato and not to Socrates nor Glaucon.

[Insert commentary on §539-40.]

The journey of the Enlightenment is a 'struggle' because its protagonist
conducts itself negatively.[^3] Enlightened consciousness casts itself against
the world, at least insofar as it takes the world to be caught up in illusions
and deceptions. In its negativity, it is in the same party as skepticism and
self-actualising reason, but it is distinguished from these former shapes of
consciousness insofar as it emerges from and relates to *substance*, not just
self-consciousness; the Enlightenment was always a social movement, not just a
mental exercise of self-assertion. In the *Meditations*, Descartes---a
practitioner of pure insight if there ever was one---made the move from thought
to substance, both in his proof of external objects and his move from *cogito*
to *res cogitans*. In Enlightenment, insight makes the same move, recognising
that its ideal must become (socially) substantial if it is to retain any
stability and meaning---a lesson we learned at the eclipse of the chapter on
Reason---and that it can do this only if it is *universalised*.

But Descartes (and Francis Bacon too) sought to *reconcile* scientific knowledge
of substances with religious belief. The Cartesian proof of materiality goes
hand in hand with his proof of the existence of God. It is therefore in these
seventeenth-century thinkers that we see stark evidence of faith and insight's
parity as the two facades of pure consciousness. The Enlightenment, which (at
least for Hegel) emerges from the turn of pure insight *against* faith, must
therefore begin later, with eighteenth-century, mostly French writers writers
like Diderot and d'Holbach. Consider that Descartes is a dualist, apportioning
room for both faith and science, whereas Diderot is a proponent of monist
naturalism. This non-dualism applies even to the *theists* of Enlightenment,
like Pierre Bayle: for these radically enlightened writers, even as a believer
one must concede that there is a single basis for all genuine
thought---*reason*---and that this basis holds everywhere, for everyone.[^4] In
this idea we can see already Hegel's critical point: that the Enlightenment
manifests its own kind of faith, and is not so distinct from its antagonist (as
the master is not so distinct from his slave): both positions believe that
thought must be subjected to an external criterion which is its own source of
legitimation and which subjects every individual equally.

Although enlightened insight does not recognise itself as a form of faith from
the start, it does recognise faith as a form of *false* insight: the faithful
claim to understand the world and their place in it, but they do so in a manner
that is immediate, naïve, and devoid of self-reflection. Faith is a
'tissue'---there is medical imagery here which Hegel will return to---of
'superstitions, prejudices, and errors.'[^5] Indeed, Enlightenment formulates a
whole map of the social world that is caught up in faith: first there is the
faith itself, manifested in 'the duped masses';[^6] secondly, the 'priesthood'
who employ their deformed insight, based in self-interest and not
self-reflection, for the sake of deceiving the masses; thirdly, 'despotism': a
'conceptless unity of the real and the ideal realm', a totally ideological
structure which feeds off of the masses *and* the priesthood that dupes them. We
have already seen, in the first conflicts between faith and pure insight, the
critique of belief-as-projection that Enlightenment philosophers levelled
against Christianity. The critique of religion as a vehicle of despotism was
Enlightenment's second critique. While the projection-critique asked, 'what can
I know?', the deception-critique asks: 'what does this knowledge serve?' Already
in Enlightenment, therefore, we see an early seed of the twentieth century's
ideology critique.[^7]
